NOTE 


The contents of this document were downloaded from https://archive. 
org/details/always-with-honor-by-pyotr-wrangel-z-lib. org/mode/2up. 

Unfortunately, pages 26, 27, 56 and 57 appear to have been 
overlooked during the original scans for that document. Thus, for the 
sake of completeness, these missing pages were subsequently found, 
reformatted in accordance with the original layout, and inserted into 
this PDF file. Also inserted were images of the original front and 
back covers of the first English publication. 


—CM 


ALWAYS WITH HONOUR 


by 


GENERAL BARON PETER N. WRANGEL 


With a Foreword by 
HERBERT HOOVER 


97 377 


ROBERT SPELLER & SONS 
New York 36 


2 AA 


* ` | ublishers, Ine 
— — F * aon? 
SIY Ro 0 


z N 
* 33 West j2nd Stree 
J3 


N 


y = 7.1 1885 
~ { No. od 
; ress Catalog Car 5 
Cong 
Library i 


4 2 3 * 4 7 


247. 
47/951 8 


i 5 
Second Printing 196 
oc 


Uthographed in U.S.A. by 
EDWARDs BROTHERS, 


INC. 
Aan Arbor, Michigan 


CONTENTS 


PART I 
THE BIRTH OF THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 


Cart 


s 


vii. 


THD REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 
THE PROVISIONAL COVERNMLENT 

UNDER THE YOKE OF BOLSHEVisM 

THE LIBERATION OF NORTHEAN CAUCASIA 
THE MARCH ON Moscow 

THE REVOLT IN KUBAN 

DISASTER 


* * * 


PART II 


ON THE LAST STRIP OF NATIVE SOIL 
THE CHANGE OF POWER 


EARLY PROGRESS . . . s ’ 
THE AGRARIAN PROBLEM AND THE DISTRICT ZEMSTVO 
ON THE EVE OF THE OFFENSIVE 


POR WARD! È e 


* * * * * * * 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 
IN THE KUBAN i ‘ , A i 3 
"CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL!” 
ACROSS THE DNIEPER ` 
THE LAST VENTURE > 


* * * * 


INTO THE UNKNOWN 


PART III 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER 


INDEX ‘ . 


108 


37 
164 
189 
102 
114 
222 
249 
274 
289 
307 
313 


331 
353 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


— a 


L GENERAL WRANGTL , Frontispece 


i 
Facaned Peer 


3. THE STAPF OF THE ARMY OF THE SOUTH PEFTERN FRONT 10 
. N. . SKOROPADIEY, HETMAN OF THE UKARANI 41 

4. GENERAL MAPMAIEVSKY REVIEWING THI IND KORNTILOY 
| APGIMENT 40 
f „ CENFRALS KOMANOVSKY, DENIKIN, AND SOKOLOV i , 40 
é. TSARITSINS THE PARADE OF THE TROOPS al 
7. TSARITSIN; THE CAOWD OUTHDE THI CATHEDRAL at 

4. GENERAL BARON WRANGEL, COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF 
THE RUSSIAN NATIONAL ARMY 60 

g. GENERAL WRANGEL, KAIVOCHEIN, AND GENERAL 
CMATILOV n r ét 
10, SEBASTOPOL: GENERAL WRANGEL ADDRESSING THE 

TROOPS, a ' 90 
17. THE ATAMANS OF ASTRAKHAN, THE TEREK, AND THE DON 9! 
12. GENERAL WRANGEL ON THE QUAY .- à : 120 
tj, FINAL DEPARTURE OF THE TROOPS 10 
t4: DEPARTURE OF THE CIVILIAN POPULATION 120 
1g, THE LAST PATROL . s å A i 0 0 . t30 

16. ADMIRAL DUMESNIL READING TO THE FRENCH SAILORS 
HIS PAREWELL ADDRESS TO GENERAL WRANGEL » PEES 
y. ON BOARD THE “WALDECK ROUSSEAU” i . 121 
18. THE CAUISER “GENERAL KORNILOV” . i a . 

19. TROOPS OF THE IST ARMY CORPS ON BOARD THE TRANS- 
121 


PORT SARA TOY b i b - - - r 


WRANGEL 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL 


racing 
* 
— 
EA è * * > ə 
so «PUTTING OUT TO 5 "25 
st. IN THE OPEN * . , 17 
PHORUS . . ‘ , - 
12. TRANSPORTS IN THE BOS 175 
i}. CENBAAL A. P. KOUTEPOY s : A s à 135 
14. GENERAL WRANGEL WITH GENERAL MANGIN à x 2 1 
° > 9 
NGEL WITH STAFI ; i j i 
2i. GENERAL WRANGE 2e 
16. GENERAL WRANGEL, GENERAL CHATILOV, AND GENERAL 
BOGAYEVERY =, . + ' . . : x 17 
t 
17. e OF THE TROOPS . s ` . . á . 
. ty 
a5. GENERAL WRANGEL x ‘ $ s . z 
f 30 
23 PORTRAIT OF GENERAL WRANGEL e s : 
3 Jo 
Map L THE THEATEE oF WAR IN NORTHERN FAUCASIAs torg 
Mar H. the y 349 
IEATRE OP WAR IN SOUTH RUSSIA; 9186919 j 
10 


Mar IIl. Trg THEATRE OF WAR IN THE CRIMEA; 191919290 
35 


— .. 


FOREWORD 


tangel's memoirs are being made 


[ AM GLAD that General W 
The title, ALWAYS VITH 


available to the Amencan people. 
Honour, envisages the man. 

General Wrangel was educated as an engineer. He de- 
parted from that profession to serve his country in war. His 
first military service Was in the Russo-Japanese War in 1904 
as an officer in a Cossack régiment- In the First World War 
he rose rapidly in the Russian Army to the rank of Major 
General. 

I did not know General Wrangel personally. But having 
charge of European relief and reconstruction measures on 
behalf of the Allies after the First World War, my duties 
extended to the Black Sea reg'on. I was therefore familiar 
with the anti-Communist military operations in Sout 
Russia and particularly the army commanded by General 
Wrangel. 

General Wrangel was one of the first of the Russian 
leaders to realize the dangers of the Communist revolution 
to the Russian people and the world. Immediately after the 
seizure of the Government by the Communists he joined the 
“White” armies under General Denikin in South Russia as 
one of his principal commanders. | was informed at that 
time by the Allied military authorities that Genera! Denikin 
was wholly inadequate to his task and that General Wran- 
gel, who was his subordinate, had the military and personal 
qualities which might bring victory over the Red armies. 

After Denikin's defeat General Wrangel took command 
of the small disorganized remnants. Starting with an army 
no better equipped than Washington’s at Valley Forge, he 
recovered the Crimea against ten to one odds. But in the 


D 


withdraw through Sevasto 
end he was compelled to e the remnants of hi Pol to 
in order to save sarm 


n refugees. American Admiral Mo 


~ 


<a og 
foregn counti i 
3 host of Rusia i 
notes who was in Sevastopol at this moment, says: 
Without any disorder Se 

; PM... - General Wrange 


Until his death in 1928 General Wrangel devoted all hi, 
resources to the service of Russian refugees dispersed oye, 


Europe. H's wife Olga took a devoted part. 
In an address six months before his passing, he said: 


History, which knows no favouritism, will tell the im. 
portance of our struggle, the capacity of our sacrifices. It will 
keow chat the fight we carried on for the love of our count 
for the reverrection of Russia as a nation. was indeed ar the 
tame — to safeguard the culture of Europe, the struggle for 
ia age- long 233 for the defence of Europe against the 


vartopol was quickly evacuated 4, 
j was the last to leave. 


General Wrangel’s memoi 
devotion. ous are the story of that great 


PART I 
THE BIRTH OF THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 


PART I 


CHAPTER I 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE 
COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 


L On THE VERGE 

Towarns the winter of 1916 the bloody Struggles which had 
been waged throughout the summer and autumn drew to a 
close. We . out position, filled in the gaps in out 
effective forces, and reorganized generally. 

The experience gained from two years of warfare had not 
been acquired in vain. We had learnt a great deal, and the 
shortcomings for which we had paid so dearly were now 
discounted. A number of generals who had not kept pace 
with modern needs had had to give up their commands, and 
life had brought other more capable men to the fore. But 
nepotism, which permeated all spheres of Russian life, still 
brought unworthy men into 8 positions too often. 
Convention, routine, and fear of disregarding the custom of 
promotion by 3 Sill held sway, especially amongst 
the higher military staff. 

After two years of warfare, the Army was not what it had 
been. The majority of the original officers and men, especially 
in the infantry, had been killed or put out of action. 

The new officers, hastily trained, and lacking military 
education and esprit de corps, could not make satisfactory 
instructots for the men. They knew how to die bravely for 
the honour of their country and their flag, like all the Staf- 
officers, but they felt that had been uprooted from their 
normal and anything but military work, and had neither the 
mentality nor the spirit of the true soldier. They found 
difficulty in enduring the dangers, fatigue, and ptivations of 
* at the front, — 0 them meant nothing but suffeting. 
t was impossible for them to inspire the tr and put 
* aan into theirt men. rA 1 i 

either were the troops what they had been. The origi 
soldiers, inured to fatigue and privation, and brave in — 
were better than ever; but there were few of them left. The 
5 


‘ 


) by no means satisfactory. The re, 
— — fathers of families who had tn dra Ye 


say fn fs vilages, and were wars only in it 
hemselves, For they had forgotten d thous 2 time 
the had been soldiers; they based — “nought Only of 

Ser- ir homes as soon . 

“Before they were sent the frank these en were pa 
through the cadres and given some preliminary training, buy 
— inadequate, There were not enough cadres, and the 
barracks allotted to them were too small to — the me, 
— the instructors, both commissioned and Non. 
commissioned officers, were not up to their work. They Were 
either disabled and worn out from aétive service, or else Very 
young officers who themselves had much to learn, 

The infantry, whose losses were heaviest of any, suffereg 
most from this arrangement. But nevertheless, in spite of 
everything, the Army was still strong and impressive, 
morale oft the troops was excellent, and the discipline perfect 
I never once saw or even heard of the slightest ex tession of 
disaffection or disorder; indeed, before this could happen, 
the very idea of authority had to 1 and the generals 
themselves had to set the example of i 
loyalty which existed between — 

It is obvious that after two years of warfare the moral 

S of the army could not have slackened, and 
respect for the law diminished. — tioning, an inevitable 


2 ak Bate Gee ers opr for 
people „Base instinGs were arouse but T 
repeat that nr Would not have been get in motion but for 


great deal of work was being done, especially in th wak 
of the Army, behind-the-lines, by a numerous S of ies : 
which was on the increase during these Jast months, The 
mobili d i 


* 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 5 


especially the ensigns ; for the staff and soldiers of the technical 
units were recruited from amongst the intelligentzia. 

Most of the Army, rank and file as well as officers, took no 

art at all in politics: they had other things to do, and, besides, 
they lacked newspapers and information, One party amongst 
the officers echoed the gossip of the neighbouring General 
Staff. They believed that General Headquarters were an 
courant with events in the country, and prophesied that the 
disorder in the intetior would finally react on the Army and 
so lead to its defeat. 

We continually told one another that things would not 
come to this pass in Petersburg, 

Those of us who loved our country and the Army were 
terribly anxious at the continual changes in the Ministry, the 
conflicts between the Government and the Duma, the ever- 
increasing number of petitions and appeals addressed to the 
Czar by many influential organizations, each one demanding 
popular control, and, above all, by the alarming rumours 
concerning certain persons in the Czar’s entourage. 

The patriots amongst the High Command suffered deeply 
as they watched the Czar making fatal mistakes whilst the 
danger grew and came ever nearer; they held mistaken views, 
but they believed in them sincerely; they contemplated the 

ossibility of a revolution from within the Palace to be 
effected by means of a bloodless coup d'état, General Krymov, 
my immediate superior, was one of those who was strongly in 
favour of this plan. He was commander of a division of 
Oussourian Cossacks in which I commanded a regiment of 
Nertchinsk Cossacks. 

During the long discussions we had on many an evening 
he tried again and again to prove to me that things could not 
go on as they were, that we must prevent a catastrophe, and 
that we ought to find men who, without a day’s delay, would 
remove the Czar by means of a revolution from within the 
Palace, 

There were other commanders who also agreed that things 
could not go on as they were, but they realized how inoppor- 
tune a change in time of war would be, and saw that it would 
inevitably entail the collapse of the Army and the ruin of the 
country. 

Others, again, desired a revolution for purely personal 
reasons. honing to find in it scone for their ambitions. or to 


s OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
nts w 
‘r apd settle their acoou ith Such 9 


fom it 
— aden as def — if from the beginn 
dran onen A ayarters and the ges OF y 
ai, t 


Jeton fr their pe 
role had forgotten ed “the Army would not na QS 
ao : a to anarchy, or “7 * 


onani 
nor the iO ve been checked in time, 
8. rect iment of Nertchinsk Cossacks a 
inen during winter of 1916, was part of a diy ich 
souran Cossacks. This division, recruited from po. ton 
Sibera, enjoyed 2 high tion in the Army. It had og. itn 
welk with glory many umes, and recentiy my regiment pad 
been * rewarded for distin shed conduct in Gan 
His Majesty bad appointed his son honorary Commande, alicia 
regiment, which was henceforth known as the Crareyi by 
During 3 
I the Civil War the maj ity of the off 
Oussouran division, and of the Nertchinsk . 
particular, were in Admiral Koltchak’s army, and met . in 
under the command of Ataman Semenov and ct again 
pees st aay ah N peaking, — rak : 
8 sa arp rar of the fifth and sixth squadra, he 
Semenov was a Transbaikalian — atk. and thick 
was of a specifically Cossack calibre, saa te tors s intelligence 


And 


O A oe 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 7 


ted. After the war he went back to Russia, where 
Mon bret ner made him enter a military school. He passed his 
officers’ examinations only with great difficulty. 

Longing for adventure and feeling out of his element in 
che regular Army, he set out for Siberia and joined a Cossack 
regiment. He did not remain with it long. One night, in a fit 
of drunken anger, he picked a petty quarrel with one of his 
comrades and Struck him. The man dealt him a sword-blow 
on his head, and he felt the effects of this wound for the rest 
of his life—it undoubtedly upset his mental balance. 

He returned to Russia and decided to travel from Vladi- 
vostock to Kharbin on horseback. He left his regiment, swun 
himself into the saddle, whistled to his dog, and set off wi | 
a fowling-piece slung over his shoulder. pig for his 
food and sleeping in the open air, he took a whole year to 
reach Kharbin. There he learnt that war had just broken out 
between the Chinese and the Mongols. He remounted his 
horse, pushed on to Mongolia, and offered his services; and 
there he was, commander of the whole cavalry force of 
Mongolia! 

At the outbreak of the World War he came back to Russia 
and joined up as sub- licutenant in the Nertchinsk regiment; 
from the first he won distinction by his co us exploits. 
He was wounded many times, and decorated with the St. 
George’s Cross (the highest honour a soldier can win), and by 
the end of the year he was a captain and in command of the 
squadron. He was of medium height, fair and puny-looking, 
with a long reddish moustache, but he possessed an iron 
constitution and ruthless energy. War was his natural element. 

He was not an officer in the ordinary sense, he knew nothing 
of system, turned up his nose at discipline, and was ignorant 
of the rudiments of decency and decorum. He was not an 
officer, but a hero out of one of Mayne Reid’s novels. He was 
dirty and dressed untidily, slept on the floor with his Cossacks, 
and messed with them, When he was promoted to a civilized 
environment his lack of all 3 refinement made him 
conspicuous. ] tried in vain to awaken his conscience to the 
need for adopting at least the external a ce of an 

He was a man of queer contrasts. He had an original, 
penetrating mind, but at the same time an astonishing lack 
of culture, an extremely narrow outlook, the shyness of the 
savage, a foolish swagger, and an unbridled temper. He 


nous OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


were i 
iy esteavagani, though his means =seePHC nal 
ye ; 
soll. ih an old custom, we had to offer the 
, wil horse and the uniform of 
his name, Consequently I lef for 


; jtch. N 

for the young Caarewitc ore this I had been in Pcrerabur 
Scatcely 2 en had got it in the famous char 
which had — us the signal honour which was the cany 

— — returning to Petersburg tolay. th ed to be 
Confusion was tife in all circles; there seem s to be , 
ntiment abroad of the nearness of the terrible evens, 
Loch destiny was preparin for Russia. — the Duma and the 
Imperial Council and in different politi Soups, a Preteace 
of stern autharity was reduced to a matter ot public. speaking. 
matches and political debates; while in artisan circles and 
urban associations, there was subrerrancan propaganda at 
work, fed no doubt by Germans, Yet, at the same time, the 
majority of the population remained absorbed in its little 
daily cares, the queues lined up outside the shops, the theatres 
and cinemas were full, and the same old trivial conversations 

were to be overheard in the crowd, 

Court circles appeared to be paying no heed to the approach- 
u uc remained 
bed in their usual “weigh P} — such as the 
appointment of someone to some post, or the opinions held 


at followed its 8 and it seemed as if 
È spectar 
victims of the drama to come. — ee 


Some days after i 
Czar as his side de r 


Possessed an amazin 
not only events bur — * r 
les in which 


He remembered 
cs. One day he spoke to 
MY regiment had taken part, 


me of the batt 


— °° °&2 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 9 


although it was a long time ago and we had done nothing 
noteworthy; he even mentioned the villages in which the 
regiments of our division had been quartered. 

f began my service as aide-de-camp to the Czar one 
Saturday, relieving Duke Nicholas of Leuchtenberg, That 
day dinner was served in the Empress’s apartments. There 
were only the Imperial Family and myself at table; their 
Majesties kept me part of the evening for a chat, The Czar 
was merry and vivacious, the Grand Duchesses and the 
Czarevitch laughed together and exchanged badinage; but 
I was struck by the expression of suffering on the Empress’s 
face. She had grown much thinner in the two months since 
I had last seen her, and I particularly noticed the expression 
in her eyes, it was sad, I might say absent-minded, She was 
specially interested in the organization of medical relief in 
the: Army, and also asked me detailed questions about the 
new type of N 

The next day being Sunday, I accompanied their Majesties 
to church. The little temple, built in the old Russian style, 
was packed. Watching the Imperial couple at prayer, I 
involuntarily 2 the Czar’s expression of pious con- 
templation with the Empress’s look of sorrowful ecstasy. 

Some days later I presented the deputation from my 
regiment to His Majesty. I little dreamt that this was the last 
time I was to see the Czar, 


II. ON THE RUMANIAN Front 

That same evening I received a telegram from General 
Krymov. Our division was to leave for Rumania, so I was 
to rejoin my regiment immediately, taking back with me all 
the officers and men on leave in Petersburg. We left the 
next day. 

As far as the Rumanian frontier, the trains were running 
much as usual, but across the frontier things were very 
different. The Rumanian troops were retreating, and the line 
was blocked by trains full of refugees, wounded, and muni- 
tions. I saw for the first time what I saw daily after this, 
passengers sitting on the roofs of the carriages, on the buffers, 
and even on the engines. 

At a branch line not far from the terminus our two car- 
tiages were hooked on to an express. So that we might have 
more chance of keeping warm, I had with great difficulty 


_ — 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL — 


10 


at full speed, our train crashed into a train in front of 
the first fourteen carriages were wrecked; there Were 
hundred killed and injured. 

We found our division on the march, makin 
of the Sereth, from where we were to make for Gals 


a counter- order, and we retraced our Sens throu 
rain, soaked to the skin. P gh 


taj 
for the h 
tz, whee 


great masses of cavalry were to be concentrated, Then 


racted a promise that we should be put on at the 
s aay do not know how it happened, bur they pone of | 
us on at the back after all. This saved our lives. Dashing key 
r € 


i 
a 
I 


us 
sty 


drivin’ 


ing 


cad of trying 


! ll tra 
2 * 
* We thought Over the news A auey ing the body under the 


great anxiety. 


days of 
b i 1917 I Was 
T'was ge which g Old Nertchinsk regeom™aNde® OF the 


regiment Was 


: Thy, te part ; 
fourteen {bom I had shared vidon fala Comrades.in. 


2 
F 
M ths Bant, 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 1 


o’clock at the Queen’s Palace. They had not been able to find 
a building in Jassy roomy enough to house the entire Royal 
Family of Rumania, so the Queen and her children were 
living in one house, the King in another. 

At the Grand Duchess’s I met the commander of the town, 
General Kasakevitch, formerly aide-de-camp to the Czar. The 
Grand Duchess kept us for more than an hour. She gave me 
details of all the latest events in Petersburg, of the arrest and 
banishment to Persia of the Grand Duke Dimitri Pavlovitch; 
of the joint letter which all the members of the Imperial 
Family had sent to the Czar, beg 


ging for mercy for the Grand 
Duke; of the Caar’s refusal, and of the disgrace of the Grand 


Duke Nicholas Mikhailovitch because he had sent a violent 
letter to the Czar in which he had given expression to certain 
bitter truths. 

According to the Grand Duchess, all the members of the 
Imperial Family, even the Czar’s closest relations, realized 
very clearly the danger that was threatening the dynasty and 
the whole of Russia, The Czarina alone could not or would 
not see it. Her sister, the Grand Duchess Elizabeth, the Grand 
Duchess Cyril herself, and Princess Youssoupoff, the mother 
of Rasputin’s murderer, had all tried in vain to open her eyes. 

“I know Russia better than you do, and I have known it 
much longer; besides, there is a Russia whose existence you 
do not even realize. You only hear what is said in Petersburg 
in aig aristocratic circles; they are not ing for the 
people. If you had been with the Czar and myself at the front, 
you would have seen how the people and the Army adore him.” 

The Czarina had opened a drawer, taken out a bundle of 
letters and shown them to the Grand Duchess. “All these 
letters are from officers and soldiers, simple Russian men. 
I receive a similar pile every day: they all adore the Emperor 
and beg him not to yield an inch to the intrigues of the 

The Grand Duchess gave us to understand that the majority 
of the members of the Imperial Family, especially the family of 
the Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna (mother of the Grand 
Duke Cyril) considered it necessary to modify the existing 
order of things, and that many influential members of the 
Duma shared this view. 

This long interview with the Grand Duchess Cyril left a 

impression on my mind. I had met her many times in 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


13 j 
had never been one of her citele. H 
Petersburg, ah confidences with which she had — 
reg 


to ser me, añ i y 
seemed to me a trifie unusual, 
me, Pio thar the Grand Duk c 


S ent events, and the r ” . 7 
- head of the “revolutionary” Marines of heG chi. 


Ache Brkt days of the Revolution pep is explain many thin’ 
The following day I was invited to dine with the Ou nes, 
Rumania, who laced me beside her at table, and — of 
charming as she ts beautiful. Fortunately no one reopened as 
subject of events in oe the 
On my return to the Embassy I found a telegram į 
me that I had been promoted to the rank of 1 Aing 
divisional general was ill, I was to deputize for him Th S Our 
2 I — to rejoin the Army. ne Same 
t the end of January we received 
selves at Niehler. n 15 7 Nate * hesent Our. 
provisions and provender were plentiful and 2 A Country 
2 obtain all they needed, We marched — troops 
Winter was very sey, n 
this made the N e and we had hea wdc > 
—— doubly laborious; but our T alls; 
yere used to such conditions, and we arrived kalian 
Speedi] 
y 


and without excessive disc 
i scomfort, 
> prety Sd a y Kichinev, usually so quiet 
» Was & It was hummi with li = 
~ ng with life, 


t division, Count Keller’s cay 


tion’s division w 
ere quarter ed i TPs, an tin 

nearest sy in the : 

of on burbs, The — and ‘Own itself, of in 


Th Cars, Rave t these 
i acd Of the Winter wert co gaiety whole’ oe 
m horrors of the me and we wer 
. Ar THE Fron ob orr A s 
LUTION IN THE INTERIO 


Our divisional 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 15 


inning of March ramours of trouble in Peters- 
a oe co the town; there was talk of Strikes, 
disturbances, and risings. But as all the rumours were extremely 
vague, we paid very little attention to them, 

On March 4th or sth, about eight o'clock in the evening, 
J was having supper quietly at home when General Krymov 
telephoned me. F gathered from his tone of voice that some- 
thing serious had 2 — He said: The Revolution has 
broken out in Petersburg, and the Czar has abdicated. I am 
going to read you his Manifesto, and that of his successor, 
the Grand Duke Michael.! To-morrow the troops must 

old.“ 
ef ged the General to wait a moment, and fetched the 
shiek fae General Staff. As Krymov spoke, he wrote down 
the text. l 

The General finished reading the Czar's Manifesto and began 
on the Grand Duke Michael's. At the first words I said to the 
Chief of the General Staff: “This is the end of everything; 
this is anarchy,” — 

Certainly the very fact of the Czar’s abdication, even though 
it was provoked by social discontent, would absolute y 
Stagger the people and the Army. But this was not all. The 
danger lay in the destruction of the monarchical idea and the 
disa 3 of the monarch, During the last few years many 
loyal hearts had become alienated from the Czar. The Army 
as well as the country realized that he had endangered his 
throne by his own aétions, 

If he had abdicated in favour of his son or his brother, such 
an act would not have roused much painful feeling in the 
country, The Russian people would have sworn allegiance to 
the new Czar and continued to serve him and their country to 
the death, as they had always, done—“For the Faith, the Czar, 
and the Homeland.” 


But in the Aer circumstances, with the di 


ce 
of the Czar the very idea of authority and all the age-old 
obligations vanished, and nothing could take the place of 
either in the minds of the Russian people. 
What the offi 


cers and the Russian soldiers must have felt! 
Brought up on the monarchic principle, and loyal in their 
' The Czar abdicated 


WRANGEL 


Ged on thei 
had aĝed on their princi 
Goss, O chief meaning of the wor 8 


a c 
allegiance s9 — saw the 
them. a d temained abso 
that the High Comman Solu 

I den ding ohing to help the Army through this coat 

4 pirits of the troops, or to make them realize 
their duty. They issued no orders, and each general had to do 
what he thought was for the best. One or two stupid thin 
were done, One colonel of an infantry regiment could — 
nothing more intelligent to say to his men than that the Cza; 
had gone mad. 

I decided to communicate the two Manifestos to the soldi 
and to explain things as I saw them myself. I informed then on 
the disturbances in the interior and of the general discon of 
a natural result of the abuses committed by the official tent, 
had duped the Czar, or who had been too incompeten S who 
their duty and to cope with the difficulties of th t to do 
them I did not know why the Czar had — e a war, I told 
to abdicate, but here were the Manifestos of th — 
Grand Duke; the will of the Czar, t a e Czar and the 
allegiance, and that of his su , 70 Whom we had swo 
and since he commanded ccessor ought to be sacred to > 
Provisional Gove us to obey and be loyal to th” 

ernment, our duty was to do so to the 


Kupefaction. It i i | 
* or 


Continued to cre 
wou be optima: SUN rung fr 
gly ata ee 
Goverment w., together ocd that e den 
Was inevitable, Ewe . 
better tha 2 
t it 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY = 


a now, and not after the demobilization. Then 
the 2 return, weapons in hand, to dictate the law 
of the land in its own way. aA 

He told me the names of the members of the Provisional 
Government. Goutchkov, the Minister of War, was the only 
one who had any idea of the needs of the Army. He had been 
at the head of the Red Cross during the Russo-Japanese War, 
and President of the Committee for National Defence in the 
Duma. Now he was Chairman of the Technical 3 
Committee. Krymov, who knew him intimately, had f 1 
confidence in him. Nevertheless, the appointment of a civilian 
to the post of Minister of War in the middle of a campaign 
was a risky proceeding. 

“Yes,” Krymov said to me, “he is a real Statesman, and, 
furthermore, he knows as much about the ee you and 
I do. You will see how things go. He is not to be compared 
with those damned old routine-mongers who have spent their 
whole lives in ministries, He is worth the whole lot of them 
put together.” 

The head of the Government, Prince Lvov, had been 
President of the United Zemstvos. 1 He was reputed to be a 
staunch patriot and an honest man. Miliukov and Chin 
had been eloquent leaders of the Opposition, but of the rest, 
Terechtchenko, Nekrassov, and the others, we knew little or 
nothing.. . We were justified in doubting whether the 
necessary men, capable of taking the power into their hands, 
were to be found amongst them. 

The General gave me the newspapers which had just arrived 
from Petersburg. They were scarcely reassuring. It was clear 

that the Government was already dufting from its * 
course, taken in tow by the Soviet of the Deputies of the 
Workmen and Soldiers, I was 2 angry to heat for the 
first time that soldiers and officers — ‘end by under- 
standing one another, and officers would be forced to respect 
gah — who were men like themselves”, 
is humbug was not only repeated by nobodies, but 
such men as M. Miliukov in his speech ak the Tauride i, 
on March 2nd. 


My fears were only too well founded. The Provisi 
Government’s first measures showed that the Dike ae 


interior had gone too fat to be suppressed, and that these 
* Zemitvos = local representative assemblies, — TRANSLATOR, 


i YEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
' arangers to the Army, could do nothi 
— ftom going 22 s ng 
Pe ue morning Krymov telephoned me, saying — 
shatever you need for a few days’ 
Pips bn pees — for Petersburg. Come *— b absence, 
will tell you what it is all about. and | 
An hour later I was in Kichinev. I found the General PA 
shirt-sleeves and red breeches, 9 by crumpled = his 
which were torn to pieces and trampled u 
He was beside himself, pled underfoot 
“Read that!” he said, thrusting a newspaper int 
“They have lost their heads. God 8 remy ha hands, 
= | 47 — believe that this ĩs teally Goutchkov Heung 
¢ allow those scoundrels t € Ca 
to him. I cannot leave — dision — AA . a 
my i iat i * r sion 
sper nomen — : ee You can go, because | Pri — 
Goutchkov,” give you permission, Go to Petersburg and — 
He began to read his letter 
letter to me. In words 
ngs tat hehe the Are d de attention to ths 
with it. The Army € Army, and the whol » che 
and all those hn — * to remain outside politics ate, Russia 
against their dled with it were committi ett 
be clasped hi rom i +» In the middle of ung a crime 
letter ended by hend in his hand reading the | 
t ended by begging the ands and burst into he ee 
the Minister to re sobs. The 


same evenin . 
one of the Stations, — — for Petersbur ; 


À on z an express 
pity i Finland) was on We Liter gerede he Wir 
me detail . He w 
of the troops and ne POPE risings in he n e Fitness to 
on since the begi e Murder of offs, hick he the treason 


ty, 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 


hil waiting for our connection at Kiev, we visited the 
„ The statue of Stolypin had been knocked down and 
several houses sacked. It was here that I first heard people 


raising Kerensky ; his admirers believed that he was the day 

member of the Government with any control over the popu- 

lace; they said it was he who had put an end to the massacres 
which had begun in the first days of the Revolution. | 

At Bakhmatch, Colonel Count Mengden got into the train. 

He was the brother of the Mengden who had just been 
assassinated, and aide - de- camp to the Grand Duke Nicholas 
whom the Czar had appointed Generalissimo when he himself 
had abdicated. He told us he had just left the Grand Duke, who 
had already been advised that the Provisional Government 
desired him to give up his command to General Alexeiev. The 
Grand Duke had decided to comply with this request to avoid 
complications. Personally I considered this to be a fatal 
decision. The Grand Duke was very popular with the Army, 
with the men as well as the officers, The Supreme Command 
and the generals at the front would have bowed to his authority. 
He alone would have been able to save the Army from immi- 
nent ruin, The Provisional Government dared not even enter 
into direct conflict with him, 

Tsatskoie Selo Station was swarming with drunken, dis- 
orderly soldiers decorated with red ribbons. They were 
shouting, fooling around, splitting their sides with laughter, 
and behaving as though they were conquerors. They jostled 
the train-drivers and climbed into the carriages and the 
restaurant-car in which I was having lunch. A shock-headed 
little horror with a cigarette in his mouth and a red ribbon on 
his breast installed himself unceremoniously at the table of 
a lady dressed as a hospital nurse and began ogling her. The 
lady 37 his attempts, and he gave vent to obscene 
insults, I took him by the scruff of his neck, carried him to the 
door, and kicked him out, sending him rolling down the 
corridor. I heard the men muttering, but no one made even 
a show of defending him against me, 

The first thing I noticed in Petersburg was the profusion of 
ted ribbon. Everyone was decorated with it, not only soldiers 
but students, chauffeurs, cab-drivers, middle-class folk, women, 
children, and many officers, Men of some account, such as 


old g generals and former aides-de-camp to the Czar, wore 


* d comrade of m; 
: hment to an o E Ming 
I expressed my . — He tried to laugh it off, and ,.* 


seeing him thus fellow, don’t you know that i “id 
jokingly: “Why, my dear fellow, tst 
kingly: way y * 


Dres fashion: * 

j is ridiculous adornment absolutely Use 
9 in the capital I wore the erich 
badge, the distinguishing mark of my old regiment, On my 
epaulettes, and, of course, I wore no red rag, and not 3 soui 
. sought to molest me because of it. 

The Duma also trembled before the Soviet of the Deputic, 
of the Soldiers and Workmen, and soon let itself be dismiss. 3 

i ough, 
aey 2 and servile es to the 

wer had been apparent from the first, not o y amonge 
soldiers. officers, ad minor officials, but also in the € = 
8 and even within the ranks of the Imperial Family 
itself. 

From the very first hour of danger the Czar had 
abandoned by everyone, During the terrible time whic the 
Carina and her children had spent at Tsarskoie Sc 
member of the Imperial Family had gone to their aid. 

The Grand Duke Cyril Vlada 
of-the-Guard to the D 


w TA wa A A 8 Ay 


a Dm DÀ - = ~*~ 


uma in person, hastening to Present 
With 


interviews with the utmost indignation. 


The Struggle for Power between the i 
mee Deputies of the Workmen and Soldiers ad the S, . 
which to fight e ee finding that it had no forces with 

prabeda aby Y, took more and more to the fatal course 


etter 
ut of all that ou say. 
ous, should We go. sn CS, but to-day we should al 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY » 


I told him that to-day iron discipline was more indis- 
asable than ever, that we ought to Strengthen and not 
discredit the authority of the leaders, and that the Govern- 


ment’s orders were intended to undermine the foundations 
of the Army. In short, I said all that I should have said in 
my military capacity. | 

He listened to me very attentively and made same notes. 

“You interest me very much; but I will not conceal from 

ou that the information we have received from the repre- 
sentatives of the Army does not coincide with what you have 
just told me, he said. 

That I can well believe,” I replied. But would you be 

ood enough to tell me, sir, to what representatives of the 
Army you are referring? To those who have been elected by 
nobody but themselves, and to-day lord it with the Soviet, ot 
to those who Stroll about the streets, adorned with red 
ribbons? In Petersburg now the only real soldiers are those 
lying in the hospitals. It is not they, obviously, who have 

iven you your information. I have no doubt that the others 
f have mentioned hastened to throw in their lot with the 
Revolution as soon as it broke out.” 

“Well, since it is not my province,” he concluded, “I will 
refrain from expressing an opinion. M. Goutchkov is more 
competent than I to with these questions. In any case, 
I will inform him of our interview, and when he returns he 
will probably see you himself.” 

I found a telegram from General Krymov awaiting me at 
home. The Minister of War had summoned him to Peters- 
burp, #0 I was to go back to take his place. When I arrived at 
Kichinev, Krymov had already left for the capital, takin 
Samarin, his chief-of-staff with him, for he had been appoint 
chief of the Minister of War’s Cabinct. He was replaced by 
Colonel Polkovnikov, who later on, after General Rornilov $ 
rebellion, played such a disastrous part during the days when 
the Provisional Government was falling from power. As 
chief of the Divisional Staff he was a good worker and a 
conscientious officer, 

We went through bad times. The Provisional Government 
continued to lose ground to the Soviet, which soon began to 
lay down the law to it. 

The Army realized that this was ing, and instinctively 
tried to supply a remedy. A number of regiments informed the 


5 OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
i s, that the 

their commanders, t y wo 

rd off anarchy. All the regiments a 


mbet. 
ere of the nu did not know how to take 


ately pe hoch help, or did not wish to. Goutchkoy 
a visit to the Army At this oy R ted a Very 
saying that the Provision overnment Was 
enough to dispense with all external Suppor 
d been no division of power, and that the Soviet: 
ment were acting in complete agreement, 
Each commanding officer id as he pleased, without 
consulting his colleagues of the other forces and divisions 
Whil@ Count Keller refused to sweat allegiance to the Pro. 
visional Government, and made his troops march past to the 
ial Hymn when he took leave of th 


strains of the old Imperi when 
General Broussiloff had himself carried at the head of his 


tae * an . decorated with red ribbons. . . . 
March 17th I went along to a fête which o 
Cossack regiments was holding. This regiment — j —— 
enough in battle, but rotten at heart. As I appcoached ae 
horseback I saw that most of the squadrons had replaced ni 
battalion colours with red flags. Passing dow 2 oak 
I noticed that one of these flags was s . ih b opas 
was made out of a skirt such as the kas t kin ae 
act asked the Colonel the meaning of this 8 
General, the Cossacks ordered it?” | Be fey sap lly wine 
the Cossacks bad to 1 replied that in the Army 
the tegiment in the usual wa b not make them. I saluted 
to the glory of your te aden z “T came here to 
under our glorious old 


MEMOIR 


of t soldi 
and Turned beef 200th the shadow of a ted N 


nase Who were. Wr 1 
on om his co - When I heard 
themselves hin bol the division that ee and ordered him 
nes, where both of i and present 

were brought 


1 


SCL The WPESATLEAN 


OF Trt 


rite STAFP OF THE ARMY 


and Scherbatche' 


Klein, Croutor, Schouvacy and Doukoi 


Ch Pus Generals Souchomilno, 


A. I. Gourchkeoy. 


On bis deft, Generals 


j 
, 


Broussiloy, 


Centre, 


un 


Baloucv, 


‘seneral Ebner 


On the foothourd, 


rib REY 


E xcept f€ vf 
the division. 
General 
ddinted ce 
unt Kelle: 

Since 
hundred and 
dismissed fr 
regardless © 

rocecding * 
of the higher 
the replacing 
troops, espe 
effect on the 

General k 
which had 1 
Baltic Fleet. 

Krymov ! 
Governmen 
regained hi 
Governmen 
events, in s] 
of the Gove 
expected to 
the Army, 1 
would be th 

Also, the 
division trar 
12th divisio 

I was far 
the Cossack 
where the I 
Japanese W 
thtough an 

ecome the 


THE REVOLUTION AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE ARMY 2 


Except for this incident, order was maintained throughout 
sion, 
he e Krymov came back on March zoth. He had been 
appointed commander of the 3rd Cavalry Corps in place of 
Creat Keller. s 

Since M. Goutchkoy had been at the War Office, one 
hundred and forty-three of the higher commanders had been 
dismissed from the military Staff, and had been replaced 
regardless of the custom of promotion by seniority, This 

roceeding Was a very grave mistake. It is true that a number 
of the higher commanders lacked ability, but the mass-changes, 
the replacing of old generals by men who were unknown to the 
troops, especially at such a critical moment, had a disastrous 
effect on the internal order and the fighting · powet of the Army. 

General Krymov told me of the massacres at Kronstadt, 
which had put a period to the life of the best officers of the 
Baltic Fleet. The sailors had assassinated them. 

Krymov had just seen the new members of the Provisional 
Government; several of them were his friends, and he had 
regained his courage, According to him, the Provisional 
Government was strong cnough to make itself master of 
events, in spite of its appearance of weakness. The members 
of the Government fully realized the necessity for this. They 
expected to be supported by large sections of society and of 
the Army, but its bee support, according to Krymov, 
would be the Cossacks. 

Also, the General had managed to get my Oussourian 
division transferred to his Army Cotps, in place of the gallant 
12th division of regular cavalry. 

I was far from sharing the hopes he entertained concernin 
the Cossacks, I had pan part of my youth in the distrig 
where the Don Cossacks live, I had gone through the Russo- 
Japanese War in a Cossack regiment, and had since commanded 
4 regiment, a brigade, and a division of Cossacks. I knew them 
through and through, and I knew that they could easily 
become the tool of Cossack political cliques, 

4 separatist tendencies among the Cossacks were a serious 
ger at this time, because Cossack units formed part of 
na 85 saat ag divisions, 
ev t there were other ways of combatin 
of he ay rs need to ely on only one sein 
y tor support, but that we could achieve agreement 


ts 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL np 


23 
the command and weld the Army into one. 
But Tailed to convince General Krymov: he had passi Unig 
faith in his new idea. The troops understood ir, and bese 
distinguish between Cossack and non-Cossack officers Gru t 
cers who were not Cossack asked to 10 


away. Several offi 


transferred to other regiments, 
I told the General that even admitting that I was mig 


and he right (and I would to God it had been so!), we 

be consistent and avoid anything which might hind mug 
success of his plans in the smallest degree; that I AGr i, the 
3 by birth, rar having 8 served in the t being 
8 ny ie crm could not possibly be a suitable colleap 

General Krymov understood me, and di 

, d 

pan As our appointments had not yet — eee the 
ys obtain another division without any di shed, | 
1 eral wrote to the Minister of War to thi culty. The 

pril sth I left for Petersburg, s eſſect, and on 


CHAPTER II 
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


THE 


rsburg I found that excitement had reached a higher 
pitch than ever. From morning till night and from night till 
morning the streets were crowded, especially with soldiers, 
who were tolling about aimlessly, Red ribbons had gone 
out of fashion, but untidiness and carelessness were increasing 
noticeably. The soldiers passed their time in eating sunflower 
seeds, Staring at the officers without saluting them, and 
jostling passers-by. 

Endless meetings were held all over the place—at the 
Tauride Palace, in the riding: schools, the arracks, the 
Town Hall, the schools, and elsewhere, especially in public 

laces and at the cross-roads, 

Those who had been forced to be silent for centuries now 
burned to make up for lost time. In the theatres and the 
cinemas there was invariably some babbler who would stand 
on a chait and harangue the audience during the intervals. 
The Press was overflowing with articles, and it was always 
the same old Story: “the peaceful Revolution”, “the Struggle 
for liberty”, “the safeguarding of the privileges already won”, 
There was no longer any mention of the welfare of Russia, 
only of the welfare of the “conquests of the Revolution”. 

The Struggle between the Government and the Soviet went 
on, To give the demagogues their due, they made for their goal 
sraigh orwardly, while the right wing of the Government 
shuffled and vied in cunning with the Bolsheviks, supported 
and subsidized as they were by Germany. They had seized the 
Hotel of the Dancer Kchesinska in broad daylight, and were 
preaching peace from its balcony. The Government trembled 
and took no action. The old ministers and the former higher 
officials were in prison, not because they had been accused 
of sedition against the new Government, but simply because 
such was the good pleasure of the revolutionary democracy. 

The Government, or rather the Soviet, suppressed the 

e newspapers, whilst the Press of Left con- 


tinued its campaign against the Army. 
8 


In Pete 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Investigations were the order of the day. A sea = 


ouse of the Dowager-Empress, who Jip s. 
Chimes, oad this mark you, by order of the authorities ati 
And these gentlemen of the Government, who till 20 
had been reproaching the Czar for his weakness and atj, 
now showed themselves to be far weaker, far more įr L 
than he had been, and much more foolish than the Clute 
officials of the régime they had overthrown. hig 
On Aptil zoth the Red Guard marched agai 
Government for the first time, and the Governmen: d the 
jeld an inch. At the corner of the Nevsk and id Dor 
— some passers-by were killed. I saw ; | 
restaurant where I was having lunch. The 
top. speed, the cab-drivers lashed their old 
scoundrels, with faces like gallows-birds 
to the Strains of the International. The i n 
Red Guard, were loudin accusing the Goy 
i $ sarp along to the Ministry of War, w * $ 
e i . ‘ 
staff F of the Cabinet, Colone! Samarin, our former chier 
1 ell, Col * 7 e 4 
esitas is onel,“ I said, 


Government cannot 
ans "ered t r À shed R r = 
moral presi 8 a spit, the Government blo d” he 
The next is the Sorin oF the People for and 55 its 


vV ; * 
the troops to Icave their ü, raes wichen order er 
| ou ‘Or 


4 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT at 
me way or another the confusion had to be checked, 


8 $ 
r shore all, a man had to be found whom the majority 


dan accept as leader—a man popular with the Army, who 
pare 8 troops if necessary, and rely on the support of 
their bayonets. I considered: only two men suitable for this 
rile—General Letchitsky, the Commander-in-Chief of the 
ch Army, and General Komilov; both of them brave, 
enterprising, distinguished men, and both adored by the 
Army. Letchitsky, disgusted with the course things had 
taken, had sent in his resignation, and was living as 4 private 
tson. Komilov at this time was commanding the troops in 
the capital, a particularly favourable circumstance, 

Į got into touch with other officers on whom 1 could rely, 
and soon we were numerous enough to be able to begin wor 

Suddenly, at the beginning of May, General Kornilov 
definitely broke with the Soviet and left his post. He accepted 
the command of the 8th Army, which was in Galicia. Amongst 
others, General Letchitsky was nominated as successor to 
General Kornilov, I decided to speak to him. . 

1 explained the position, and said that we were at his 
disposal, and that we had money ty to meet the initial 

ses, I added that, once Kornilov had left, he would be 
nominated as before to replace him, and I begged him not 
to refuse the post. 

“I agree with your point of view,” Letchitsky said to me. 
“I * programme, as every soldier will. But I will 
not succeed Kornilov. I have left the Army for good. I am 
only an old soldier, and nothing more than a soldier. To make 
a success of the task you have outlined to me, it is not enough 
to be firm and honest; you must be able to adapt yourself to 
circumstances, No, it needs a younger man than I.” 

I knew the General too well to insist. 

A few days later General Kornilov left the capital, and was 
replaced by General Polovtsev, of the Caucasian division. 

Although he had gone away, Kornilov sill kept in touch 
with the capital. A certain Zawoiko, his orderly officer, was 
his go-between. I did not know this gentleman personally, but 
Colonel Count Pahlen and Lieutenant Count Schuvaloy, who 
shared my opinions, knew him well. They introduced us. 
Zawoiko seemed to me to be intelligent and energetic, but 
insincere. Did the sequel prove me wrong? Nev , as 
I knew him to be Kornilov’s confidant, I spoke freely to him, 


26 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


and told him what we had already succeeded in doing. And from 
that time on Kornilov was kept informed of our actions and 
movements. 

The Army of the day after tomorrow would have to take the 
offensive again, and the whole town as well as the enemy knew it. 
Goutchkov had resigned, and the new Minister of War, Kerensky, 
had struggled into possession. He harangued the troops, urging 
them in ringing tones to "save the Revolution." New contingents 
and many reinforcements were on the march, preceded by plac- 
ards with such inscriptions as "War to the finish," "Death is better 
than slavery," and similar tags. But it was only rarely that these 
reinforcements reached their destination. Usually the contingents 
which were "ready to die to save the Revolution" took themselves 
off on the way. 

On June 18th the Armies on the south-west front attacked the 
enemy. Kornilov's 8th Army invaded Galicia. A breach was made 
in the enemy's ranks, and the Russian Army was master of Galitch 
and Stanislavov. It seemed that after long months of anguish we 
were at last to be victorious. 

On June 30, 1917, a telegram from Headquarters informed me 
that at last I had been appointed commander of the 7th cavalry 
division in Kornilov's Army. That same day I went to join my 
division, leaving Count Pahlen at the head of the group of which 
I have spoken earlier, and taking Schuvalov with me in order to 
leave him with Kornilov, who needed him. 


II. IHE REVOLUTIONARY ARMY ON THE OFFENSIVE 


I reached Kamenetz-Podolsk on July 6th, and found bad news 
awaiting me. There was a telegram from Kerensky, couched in the 
following words:— 


The Revolutionary Army's admirable beginning has ended in 
the treason of the Grenadiers-of-the-Guard and the general rout 
of the 11th Army, which is marching towards the interior. The 
enemy have taken Tarnopol and are threatening the flank and rear 
of the 8th Army which Kornilov is commanding. The battalions 
in the encounter, mostly composed of officers, died like heroes, 
but the "Democratic Army" saw no point in imitating them or 
in dying to save the Revolution, and have scattered like a flock 
of sheep. The generals, deprived of all their forces, are powerless. 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 27 


In face of the danger which threatened them, the inefficient 
Provisional Government seemed to realize that "revolutionary 
élan" was not enough, and that discipline also was necessary. The 
appointment of General Kornilov as Commander-in-Chief of the 
south-eastern front seemed to confirm this. I had hoped to find 
General Kornilov still with the Army, and Count Schuvalov and 
I went immediately to Kolomea, where I thought we should find 
him. Colonel Count Heyden, who was on his Staff, told me that 
the General was still at the front, would not be back till the evening, 
and was leaving the next day for his new Headquarters. 

I learnt from Count Heyden that my division (Olviopol Lancers, 
White Russian Hussars, Kinbourn Dragoons, and the 2nd Don 
Cossacks) had not yet been completely disorganized by democra- 
tization. My predecessor, as well as one of the colonels, had already 
been forced to leave, but as the officers’ corps was excellent, and 
the regiments were sound on the whole, it would not be difficult 
to take them in hand again. 

Whilst we were talking, a young civilian in a brand new tunic, 
with a rakish cap and a soldierly manner, came into the room. The 
Count introduced us. It was M. Philonenko, commissioner and 
delegate from the 8th Army. 

There and then, with extraordinary self-assurance, he began to 
speak of our military operations and strategy. According to him, 
he had helped considerably in the maintenance of discipline, and 
he implied that he was largely responsible for the appointment of 
the Commander-in-Chief. He promised me his help and protec- 
tion too, if, by any chance, I wanted to get rid of any officers and 
soldiers or of any committees of the troops, he was at my service. 

I knew Kornilov personally through having dined with him once 
at the Czar's table in Moghilev, and I had spent an hour or two in 
the same railway-carriage with him. Small, spare, swarthy, of the 
Mongolian type, with a little goatee beard and a black moustache, 
he spoke in short, abrupt sentences. One had only to see him to 
realize that he was a man of indomitable energy and great breadth 
of mind. 

I told him that I was proceeding with the organization of the 
capital, and offered to leave Schuvalov with him, if he cared to have 
him. He kept him as his orderly officer. 

The General, who was due to leave for his new Headquarters 
in a few hours' time, invited me to dinner and introduced me 


2 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL — 
s General Tcheremissov, who Struck 8 
to his successor o never looked one strai he int A 
ted to these, for Uting te 
t 
t 


: h 
. š 11 ent, but v =r 
fact, E fy imp ressions, are — 9 
1 ve pe A 2 9 Korniloy set out for his Headquan,, 
Alter di “ont > 
and I for my division. 4 barely bad cite to review the a 
When I aces . an order from General Thet 
2 ae d ing me to g immediately to Stanislavov, whi e. 
he bad ust reached. My division was to proceed towards , oh 
— the flank of the 8th Army which was tetr eati 
brima ge 


town and cover 
he line. I gave the necessary orders to the 
as sales 1 take my place whilst I was away, an) 


off in my cat. 
p e nightfall, The General Staff was just leavin 
they were looking for wagons, removing telephones ê; 
striking camp, The train which was to take the eneral a! 
was in the Station. About a hundred wagons and Jo * 
neral Tcheremissoy explains, 


followed one after the other. Ge 
the situation to me, The whole Army was in full 


harassed by the enemy, who was at its heels, Th ie 
it was $ possible to take up was at Zbroutch. I ee A ng ee 
head of two divisions, my own and the 3rd division of tbe 
ea poetic aes they formed a ca troop * | 
œuvr 
to corer 2 — i¢ flanks of the 7th and 8th Armies and 
wanted to await the arrival of = | 
Was marchin on Stan; my own division ich 
necessary o at tanislavov, so that I could give hee = | 


* and en to te ` 
¥ join the Cau 
Perating in the M aan divis 
ery, ae the whole on 8 zone, where 
ened b "gi 
I shots I ran to the 4 dish Cre were 
an orderly Was on fire, 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT a9 


He told me that the old man was a Jew, the owner of a shop 
which had been looted; he had been roughly handled and 
had escaped death only by a miracle, 

There were only my orderly and two Hussars near at hand, 
We went into the street. | 

Pillaging was going on everywhere: windows were bei 
broken, doors smashed in, furniture destroyed, boxes fo 
open; materials and household articles covered the roadways 
and obstructed the ammiunition-wagons, lorries, and ambu- 
lances. Fires were —— all over the place: a spark was 
enough to cause severe trouble, 

Anartillery officer I met gave me some men, and I attempted 
to restore order. Coming upon a group of fugitives engaged 
in rifling a shop, I struck one of them violently with my fast 
and felled him to the ground. My two Hussars also hit out. 
I called out: “Cossacks, sce that this scoundrel is flogged.” 
And the whole lot took themselves off. 

With the assistance of the gunners, the streets were cleared 
in two hours, and the artillery and transport were able to get 
on the march. In the side-Streets looting still went on. I had 
done so much shouting that I had lost my voice. 

With the dawn a squadron of lancers arrived. I com- 
manded the colonel who was with them to put an end to the 
pogrom, no matter what the cost. He had a few of the pillagers 
shot down, and order was restored, 

I got into a car and set off to rejoin my Cossack division. 
Amongst the officers attached to the Divisional Staff I came 
across the former Minister of War, Goutchkov, who had just 
joined up. 

The Army was in retreat all along the line. As for Monaster- 
gisk, which was occupied by one of my regiments, there was 
a big munition depot there, and Headquarters had sent along 
an engineering officer with orders to destroy it. 

I was just having dinner when I learnt that my Ossetines : 
Were at grips with the enemy in Monastergisk, I motored over 
there with my chief-of ail As we approached the town we 
saw a huge column of smoke mounting skywards. Then there 
was an explosion which shook the ground; it was followed 
by a second and a third. The town was on fire. We met 
about a hundred men with herds of cattle in full flight. On 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

ineering Officer a 
* covered that the cnginec „ger 
inquiry . 7 1 — had set fite to the depots WI the? 
fia warmiag the troops, who were skirmishing on the cn 
kirts of the town. More than a dozen Re t —— alry s N 

colonel of the regiment had been killed, victims of 2 pi > 
7 inal negligence. ‘ 

ol That —.— * enemy entered the town, and | took up 

iti - versts to the cast. l 
a position some attacked all along the line, For h Oun 


dawn the enemy atta . 
all thei efforts were in vain. Towards evening the G 


managed to make themselves masters of a village occy Died by 
a detachment of my Kinbourn Dragoons, and threatened r 
with a breach. I ordered the other squadrons of the regim - 


to attack. The Germans were beaten. 
We took some prisoners and captured some machine- 


By nightfall the danger was over, and I retired, covering 8 


infantry. . 
The infantry was still peeing all along the line, Discipline 


was gone, and numerous Stagg i 


ers were looting every 

they passed through. My corps was manceuvring on the 
flanks of the 7th and 8th Armics, and was gradually passin 
one to the offensive. 8 
is went on for some days. I had not yet got to 

regiments, nor they me, so T marched 8 2 y 
sometimes with another, so that I could watch them at work 
The Army crossed the Zbroutch and took UP its Position 
on the right bank, in close touch with the enemy, My — 
remained half a day’s march to the west of the Zbroutch, z 


behind the line occu ied th a 
tnt ay . ase aeg rating de pe CE 
deflected the righ fan brigade, Profiting by this retreat 
marching at the time ft, the 7th division, with which Tot 
saddle lea ine the we. J ordered three regiments į was 
From ris .* an to cover the artillery into the 

a 

Sh rti I watched the enemy app roa ching R 


ull trot, 0 aft 
The en y had’ erwards 2 shell passed Over 
was fiting on us. probably sighted our group of pr eK 


I ordered the artillery tO open an 


enflade, and then set the 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT st 
iments on to the Austrians, The cnemy turned tall 

y sut waiting for an encounter. Ar this moment another 
vithe was turning our left flank. Leaving one regiment to 


. — . à r 
bri gas the enemy, 1 commanded the three regiments which 
Pu ined co charge for the second time, and again the enemy 
rem fore the onslaught. 


shdrew be 2 
wie he meanwhile the Cossack division also went Over to 


overthrew the enemy, and again took up the 
ied the evening before. 
-time — enemy would not attempt to attack us 
calibre shells. 

the 


th 
P Until night 


went 
— The office: 
] had scarcely dismounted 


wounded man groancd ; 
Jloped off at top speed. Several troopers came out of the 
en in great haste, others ran to their horses. There was 
nearly a panic, I gave the command “eyes front”, sat down 
at the table, and, picking up a fragment of a newly burst shell 
which had fallen quite near, I turned to the soldiers, saying: 
“Who wants some hot rolls? Catch!“ and I threw it to one 
of them. Their faces brightened, and a laugh ran along the 
ranks, They were no longer panicky. - 
The firing soon ceased, We had only had two men killed 
and several horses wounded. The regiments set out for their 


camps. 

Then afterwards I passed them at the gallop, I shouted 
a few words to them, and they cheered me enthusiastically. 
It was one of those cle ig moments when officer and 
soldiers seem to be of one flesh. 

I have lived through other such unforgettable moments 
before and since in Manchuria, in Eastern Prussia, in Galicia, 
in the Kuban, and in the Crimea. I do not know how these 
bonds are forged on the spur of the moment, always spon- 
taneously and often without any apparent reason. One feels 
these things instinctively, though one cannot explain them, 
Without these bonds there would be no army. It is not enough 
to api ys ag well in hand; they must be yours, so that 
they follow you, not only from a sense of duty, but 
because something stronger than themselves Stirs in their 
hearts, and makes it impossible for them to do otherwise. 

The next day we crossed the Zbroutch, The operations with 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
had been entrusted were over: my cay 
alty Wa 


which we 
mentioned in dispatches. 
One fine day the chief of the Army Staff teleph 
One of our Caucasian infantry regiments had left k aned Me 
— * — could profit by this to make a breach and thr ang 
renetz. tea 
Headquarters had been there, but had broken ` 
— 4 ars the situation. The 79th infantry Arial Way 
$ 2 
I saw that the cavalry got on th * 
ambulances and thirty . in the l and found 5 
the General Staff; then I ordered a ski 88 lorries f 
the 7th division to mount, and we ee . n , regimen — 
* was already at grips with tl See Cossack 
a village which the Caucastans had — enemy and mat 
The Caucasians, who had — Nr N 3 
kilometres from the battlefield. I ord ware, camping fo 
simultaneously with a brigade of A * Chery fo attack 
deployed on to the skirmishers e 7th division which Was 
e enemy's artillery o - 
I saw our Aliren a ras: tak entilade, and suddenly 
— Our artillery sent over — 2 all along th 
tened their retreat, I d ciis, but this 
their Jances and the flat of eee my Lancers, who vi i 
as if they bad been a fock of x swords, ròunded up the it 
I let — get their — Tack i * 
made an encouraging speech ck and have some food, then 
and led them to the charge. A to them, put myself at their h 
then with spirit, and ge. i first they marched half heart 
We took three hundred 1 rm with fixed ba 4 
— — 8 and four machine wie 
0 y cam an 
cers were serious y Wounded. P and two of my orderly 
Th al ; 
Now we can feel casy oh the chief of my General Stat 
success, the regiment wi ut the Caucasians, A 
pe will fight well.” After such a 
positi rains pe en. That same ni h 
on and took themsely ght they aband i 
ves off to the interior. ‘ und tiai: 
n holding the head of 


a se ce from the Comman 
Onour and glory to your cavalry co 
'pS.—TcHeremrs 
SOY. 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


1 
hortiy afterwards General Tcheremissoy was superseded 

py General Sokovnin. On . 16th General Komiloy was 

appointed Commander-in-Chict of the Russian Army. 


[I]. KorNILOV 


When Kornilov was made Generalissimo, the Army realized 
that at last it had a real leader; the High Command felt that 
its authority would be restored, and the soldier that he was 

ing to be forced to obey. The powers of the Soldiers’ 

ittees were curtailed, 

The men who made up these Committees were not at all 
bad on the whole, After talking to them on many occasions, 
I came to the conclusion that if they were properly influenced 
and left politics alone, dealing only with ical questions, 
they might even be useful, 

Thus the democratized Commissariat frequently refused to 
hand over material when the commanders of formations asked 
for it, even when the troops were in pressing need; but they 
supplied the company delegates at the first demand, 

woiko wrote to me j I learnt from him that 
in view of the desertions in the Army, which were Steadily on 
sought other things thatthe dexth-pesaby A bs 
amon er t the i e 
Provisional Government) should be re-established for re ie 
and traitors at the front as well as in the interior. 

The letter finished with these words: 


The General statgrs me 80 tell yor #0 be patient, aad not to 


accuse us falsely letting things slide. It is impossible to 
embark on anything befoce the winter. — 
To my great astonishment, on Au 1oth or 1ath, I 
received a telegram from Supreme H — 


As you ate to be appointed to a new post, you have now 
been put st the disposal of the Commands of Armies on 
the Rumanian front; at the same time you are to keep the 
command of your cavalry corps. 


I could not make head or tail of the extremely Strange 
Wording of this telegram, so I telephoned Count Schuvalov, 
and asked him to explain to me what it was intended to 
convey, He answered that nobody knew at Supreme Head- 

D 


NERAL WRANGEL * 
MEMOIRS OF G 


: Moscow and . 
4 issim o was at \ as ‘ 
quarters | Si aa Then I received a telegram fron 
returning 
Zawoiko :— i with yoni: Aus ie 
The Generalissimo is very please Portan, 


post has been entrusted to you. 


r came to send off a brigade Of the 
Cuca e fo spin the Ce dr Gt th 
Stationed at Dno.: 7 the General Staff as direct 

. e es Tig had just received a Proclam. 
shee om Kornilov addressed to the troops. In it he 8 ke 
ph a treason”, and forbade the reception 0 y 
communications whatsoever from the President Of the 
Ministerial Council. (Kerensky’s telegram accusing Korniloy 
of rebellion arrived some hours later.) At the same time 
Headquarters ordered all the wireless apparatus to be 

en away, : 

The Army Committee Protested agains this Order, 
Were supported by 3 the Quartermaster-General. The 
Commander of the Army, General Sokovnin, and his Chief-of- 
Staff, had lost their heads. With great difficulty I obtained a 


. But he could not d 
against the Committee, and ordered the Q eet 


itor moval of the Wireless”, 
As cit the General Staff, I saw General i 
triumphantly announcing this decision to members ea 


* non execution of an order 
l eneralissimo to a cri 
— ately order the removal of Pparatus from my General 


came and told me 
r Cossack division was 
1 55 ge emoved many times Sue Priest whom I had 
eneral Odint 
on, there 50 zov, the commander 
. gt a emma 
™Portant group Of railways on S, 


road to St, itaim — Tease: ase, 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 3 


The Cossacks answered me as usual, Then the priest- 
ae seid: “Will you please note, Genesal, that the 
p here assembled aré not Cossacks, as you call them, 
‘tizens. 
17 are quite right, Father; we are all citizens. But that 
joes not revent my being a General, your being a priet, 
„nd their being brave Cossacks. That they ate brave I know 
very well. because I have seen them in battle more than once. 
That they are Cossacks I also know, for I myself have worn 
cheit uniform for years, and am proud of it.” 

And turning to the assembly : Once more, good morning, 


cks.” 
e , Your Excellency,” they shouted as one man, 


1 took my place at the president's table, and requested 
Bripadier-General Odintzov to acquaint me with the order of 
the day. He told me that they had just read Kerensky’s telegram, 
and were about to deliberate on the terms in which they were 
to let him know that the Committee would support him. 

“Splendid. And does the Committee know about the 

er-in-Chief’s telegram?” 

A fellow in a tunic, who was not a soldier at all, interrupted: 
“The Army Committee, of which I am the delegate, does not 
consider it necessary to communicate the telegram to the 


Compass Committees, 
“This telegram”, I said, “has been sent to me by the Com- 
mander of the Army, and I must communicate it to my 
brothers-in-arms. 1 will take the ibility.” 

The members of the Army Committee protested, but the 
majority shouted: “We want to hear it!” 

| read the ion from Major-General Kornilov. 

“And now, my men, you know all there is to know. I feel 
certain that you will do your duty as soldiers, and that you 
will reach a decision compatible with your conscience and 
your duty. As for myself, I am a soldier, and have nothing to 
do with politics, My Generalissimo’s orders are law to me. 
I am sure that your divisional commander will tell you the 


same thing. 
looked at Odintzov. At last he stamntered out, droppi 
tis est “Tike all the Cosacis en clea 
ith great difficulty I restrained myse supplementi 
Wi nanai, and tiking e of the — 
I went out to my car. 


— . 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
* ing into my cat Odintzov dashed up: "R 
e . . ” ) "et 
“Without answering him, I told the chauffeur to drive * 
* long consultations, the 3rd Cossack division declare 
Bia The yth division did not come to any decisis 
until the evening. hich was losin 
» Headquarters, which more 

— — — Committees, decreed that the telephong 

pas egraphs were to be put under the direct contral of; 

8 diers Committees, Furthermore, no orders coming fr 

the commanding officers were to be valid unless counters Ned 
by a member ot the Committee. Head 

It was the last straw! I galloped over to Uartets ang 

rocured an interview with the Commander of the Amy. 
Fru Excellency, your decree is a crime for an officer. I 
cannot possibly obey it, so I beg you to let me resien my 
commission.” =? ' » 

“General You are not thinking of doing that! 

“I am thinking of doing one of three things: cither of 
giving a counter-order, or of resigning my duties, OF of 
saddling the 7th division and having a little chat with the 
Commuttees face to face.” 

General Sokovnin said that he would try and arrange 
something. That same day he sent me what was in effes 
a counter-order, 

On September sth a telegram from General Sherbatchov, 
Commander-in-Chief on the Rumanian front, ordered me to 
go at once to Jassy. P 

Sherbatchov had been the head of the Military College 
where I had studied. He told me that, 2 my relations 
with Kornilov, he had sent for me so that should any unfore- 
seen contingency arise, I should be with him, and therefore, 
* to him, safe 

Two days later a telegram from the chief-of staff at Supreme 
Headquarters informed me that, by an order of September gth, 
aid Generalissimo had appointed me Commander of the 3rd 
cavalry, 

The following days were a ni htmare to me. 

Kornilov was convicted of rebellion and imprisoned. 


* * 


General Krymov, who had been ut at the head of the troo 
which were marching on the — Ar committed suicide. E- 


Kerensky the barrister, the “fevolutionary Generalissimo”, 


THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


ajemocracy's hostage” in the Provisional Government, was 
we head of the Army, 


* 


at All these events had shaken the morale of the troops very 


*. projected appointment of General Alexeiev as chief of 
che Supreme General Staff was the only glimmer of hope left. 
if Alexeiev had consented to this appointment, all would not 
have been lost. . ; 

Anxious for the fate of Count Pahlen and the officers of 
our organization, I made a hasty journey to the capital. 


IV. Tue Last Days oF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


The first m 1 did when I arrived was to call on the 
General Staff of the military district of Petersburg. There I met 
General Krasnov, whom I had known duting the Russo- 


Japanese War. 

When I told him of my recent appointment, he was los 
in a&tonishment. “But, my dear fellow, I have just been 
appointed to that very post!” 

gua somewhat disconcerting, but it did not surprise me. 
At this period, when everything was going to the devil, 
incidents like this often occurred, 

To get the matter cleared up I asked the chief of the military 
district, Colonel Polkovnikov (who had been chief-of-staff in 
my Oussourian division) what the cause of the mistake was. 

He told me that, in his opinion, the order appointing me 
was of a more recent date than that appointing Krasnov, 
and that therefore, probably, it was I who should take the 
command; but he knew nothing definite. 

He gave me the details of Krymov’s suicide. It was said 
a the ear g tn eras ski cg and the 

eralissimo had been absolutely unexpected by K v 
himself and by his troops. It was only whilst he bad bien 
stationed at Dno that he had received Kerensky’s telegram, 
E General Kornilov a traitor. According to Pol- 

ovnikov, if Krymov had continued his advance on the 
capital resolutely, Petersburg could have been taken, Unfor- 
tunately, General v, taken unawares, worn out by 
recent events, and distracted by private affairs, had begun to 
lose his head, He had delayed, and sent to Headquarters for 
instructions, thus losing precious time. Just a day too late, 


PE 2 
organize itself as an independent state. A provisional Tarts, 


t up. As a garrison for the jj 
Government had — se had 2 its command an old regimo 


rowns of the peninsu item * 
y | nies of officers, and two f 
1 — Sebestopal had already gone Red. 


batteries. The garrison in 
The new Crimean Government had ordered a generz! 


Commande 
bilization, They requested me to become rin. 
Chief . this ro eſote giving my answer I went t 


. if this new vernment had 
r likely to be Stable” 


justincation for its existence, ant a be 
On investigation, I found it to be a bad imitation of 
Kerensky’s new Government, so I refused the honour and went 


n the — of jar 8, 1918, we learnt that duri 

the night 2 skirmish had taken place between two of the 

Tartar squadrons and some Reds. The dragoons had retired 

to the mountains, the Reds had taken possession of the rown, 
and the Soviet Republic was proclaimed the same day. The 
residents wete commanded to give up their arms; a to 

boat manned by Red sailors arrived at Sebastopol, and 
domiciliary * began. : 

A gang of these ruffians came to search our house without 
any kind of a warrant. I let them get on with it, and went on 
playing with my six-year-old son, taking not the slighteg 
notice of their movements, 

They did their utmost to make me lose my temper: seeing 
that they could not do so, they went away. Since then I have 
often used this method and found it effective. 

On January roth I was awakened by the sound of firing. 
The dragoons had come back from the mountains and were 
occupying a part of the town. I went out on to the balcony, 
where my brother-in-law, a former Captain of Hussars, joined 

me. The firing was in full swing, and soon the guns boomed 
out, Two shells fell in our garden. 

At midday I was informed that half a platoon of Reds was 
stationed near our terrace. I went out to them, 

“Which of you is in charge?” 

“I am,” said a sailor. 

“Good. Let me tell you that I am a General and this gentle- 
man is a Captain. Understand that we are not hiding.“ 

‘Tr is as well that you told us. We are only after those who 


are fighting against us,” 


— — 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 3 


GENERAL MAI-MAIEVSKY REVIEWING THE 2ND KORNILOV REGIMENT 


Seated: GENERALS ROMANOVSKY, DENIKIN AND k. N. SOKOLOV 
Standing: N. I. ASTROV, N. N. SAVITCH 


6 


* ne PARADE OF THR TROOPS, JUNE 20, 1919 


r i * TS ecke 
Le Genen Mamono (on hercoack), Romano KY, Denies. 


and Wrangel 


Sadan © * = y fe 
E . po rs 


TAPITEIN: THE CROWD oer 


THE CATHEDRAL DURING THE SINGING 
OF THE Je Han, tune 19, 1919 


UNDER THE YOKE oF BOLSHEVISM 4! 


We ate only fighting against Tartats,“ said another. 
ue poor beggars belong to the age of Catherine the Great; 
they have sworn allegiance to Russia, and now they want to 
be ind ent. 

Many times since then I have thought of those words, 


spoken by an anti-nationalist and a conscious disciple of the 
International. - 
Towards evening the dragoons drew off, 
At dawn I heard sounds of smashing doors, trampling feet, 
and shouting, My door opened, several men dashed towards 
my bed, and a little spotty-faceed sailor pointed his revolver 


at aia 

“Don't move. I arrest you.“ 

“Send your men away,” I said to him. “You can ser that 
Į am alone and unarmed. I will get dressed, and then I'll 
follow you.” 

I dressed quickly and we went out of the room. Our 
servants were weeping. My brother-in-law was also arrested. 
In the courtyard, amongst about fifteen sailors, I saw one of 
our gardeners whom I had recently taken by the scruff of 
his neck and thrown out of the house because he had insulted 


my wife. 

I learnt later that he had been responsible for bringing the 
party along, The wretch shouted: “I swear that this man is 
2 General and has been backing up the Tartars; he is the 

le's enemy and a counter-revolutionary.” 
e were hooted by the crowd of idlers which had collected 
in the street. 

Then a Greek said: And I swear that they are innocent and 
took no part at all in the battle. I live oily a stone’s throw 
from here.” 

“That’s all right. We will see about it,” a sailor said to him. 

Two cars were waiting. We got into one of them, and at 
the same moment my wife rushed out and hung on to the 
door. I implored her to go back to the house, the sailors 
pushed her off, but she stood there weeping, and begged to be 
allowed to get into the car. 

“If she goes, so much the worse for her,” said a sailor. 
“Let her go.” 

She leapt into the car and we were off. 

We reached the pier, which was crowded with people. 
A torpedo-boat was moored there. As soon as the crowd saw 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


42 
A ell: “Look out! Here come p 
aa To the sited with them! To the water |” he bi 
1 caw several Corpses, all covered with blood, but te 
safely on the bridge of the torpedo-boat. We were ma de, 
below into a cabin. One sailor remained on guard Outs de, 
others weat back to the bridge. eS r 
A naval officer appeared. He looked pale and wor, = 
able object wn | 
a ee N ovet to him. “What are YOu going to * 
Jo not be alarmed, Madame. If you are innocent, om 
get out of this. I am the captain, but unfortunately 7 can! 
hin * - ee A z 
Moe sailors appeared bawling: * Let's have these ; 
drels! To the water! To the water! Coun 
The captain, supported by a few men, Succeeded ; 
uading them, ler a t deal of trouble, that the 
Revolutionary Tribunal ought to deal with us, At las th 
went away. a cy 
Another prisoner was brought in, a colonel of Engineen 
te, büt 


The worthy fellow was very anxious, not for his own 

because he had some money belonging to his men at his 
home, and “you realize what a fuss they will make if this 
money is lost”. 

I have seen death at close E pares many a time, and I am 
not afraid of it. But the idea of dying at the hands of Russian 
soldiers, of being shot like a spy or a common thief before the 
eyes of my wife, was horrible to me. Therefore I did all I could 
to induce her to go back to our children. 

“Besides, you can be of more use to me in the town than 
here. Tell our servants to come and bear witness to my 
innocence.” 

This decided her. She was ven tmission to go. But 

I 1782 everything. I felt that I should never sce her again, 
so I gave her back the watch-bracelet she had given me, which 
I always wore. She went away in tears, and then I saw het 
coming back. “I realize from this bracelet that you believe 
re are going to dic.” As the poor woman had Started off, she 
seen the crowd tear an officer to pieces. The colonel of 
Engineers was set free, but he also was soon back, He returned 


ke — : en es had been taken from him. 
unsuccessful. As h j j 
he whispered to us that the W 2 


3 


UNDER THE YOKE OF BOLSHEVISM 43 


ue him, and that there was quite a large crowd 

dome 10 ding that we too should be >, free. ai 
hee nightfall we were made to leave the ship, and were 
ped UP in the Customs-house, which was already full of 
ce ers. It Was dirty and windowless and almost unfurnished. 
Fre goor was filthy and much spat upon, Our companions in 
e were of all social grades: there were generals, 
anë officers, Students, schoolboy Tartars, and common 
ars, The hall was full of sailors and Red Guards: we could 

heat their obscene swearing. 

Alenough everybody lay down on the floor in the end, 


in spite oF their 


position, etc. he asked me: 


“To what * 

“Why have you been arrested?” 

I was just going to ask you that, but I can see that you 
do not know either. I can guess the cause of my arrest” —and 
J told him the incident of the e. aop “I do not 
know if you ate a married man, but I suppose, if you are, you 
would have done the same as I did.” 

He passed on to another prisoner. 

It went on all through the night and into the next day, when 
fresh prisoners Some people we knew very well 
were of the a r 
—— Goa Yartzeff, an octogenarian who 

About eight o clock in the evening a tall, fair, good-looki 
sailor with an intelligent face came into our prison. 
men were with him, including the student who had examined 
us the night before, and the commissioner who I had seen on 


the torpedo-boat. 
“That’s Comrade Vakula, President of the Tribunal,” said 
** our warders, He is going to sey bes lately.“ 

Nevoluti Tribunal“ passed from one prisoner to 
another. We —— old General Yartzeff, Prince Mech- 
tchersky, a Student, and some others being led away. 


genoms OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
r Vakulacame up tous. | heatd the Student who h 
2 * 1 bisper to the President: “This s the one F told 
you about.” ” ked mec. 
, oe ou arrested ? he as oy 
12 bl — f em a Russian General: it is the Only 
7 i * am ui * : 
g 2 = wearing the decorated unitutm whj 
you were probably flaunting yesterday 7 Aad without Waiting 
for an answer he turned to my wits. 
“And why were you arrested?” * 
I was not arrested; I am here of my own free will. 
He feigned surprise, 
Then why are you here?” 
I have always lived happily with my husband, and 7 
want to stay with him until the end. 
Vakula, enjoying the theatrical effect in advance, glanced 
rapidly at the prisoners who were all about us. 
Such women are not to be found every day. You owe your 
life to yout wife. Go!” and with an emphatic ctu 
painted to the door, * He 
But we were kept there for another terrible ni 
| | ght. The 
ae posas wee Si at the very door of the ptison, 
that more then | Tanh uawa into the water, T leame later 
i a red prone Were executed, including 


Once the Reds were masters of the Cri 
began in — Eupatoria, and Yalta, More — i 
cers for the most Part, were shot Pe 
the order of the j mary Bene 
nies — day, and money, jewels, and dothing — 
ortunately all this 
residents we obliges tee brn Without any system, The 


contribution proportional to j 
to it. } 
on the list as one of the chief ee “in-law, who was 


Oftune, and sold pomcientiously pay 
ree dhe ig a a ae 
° 3 she and cw 


UNDER THE YOKE OF BOLSHEVISM 4) 
ey searched my house many times, but they found nothin 


tall. The jewels and money were hidden in the stomachs an 

$ ads of my little daughter’s dolls, the furs and laces under 
4 bea of charcoal. | 

Far from denouncing us, my old servants even helped us 

deceive the Red bloodhounds. We probably owed our 
ory to them, because on the day of our arrest they, together 
with some poor people my wite had helped, had come to 
d our release. 

A decree was passed forbidding anyone to draw out more 

an a hundred roubles trom his current account—it was 
impossible to keep a large family on this amount. Our servants 
complained many times to the Commissar that they had not 
deen paid for months and claimed their due. The bank was 
ordered to pay the “proletariat” their wages, deducting the 
gum from our current account. And our loyal “proletariat” 
brought to their “oppressors eager for their blood” the money 
which after great trouble they had succeeded in wringing from 
the “grasping bourgeois.” 

On more than one night we were forced to go and seek 
a lodging in a distant part of the town, Everybody stayed 
indoors and avoided showing themselves in the Streets. 
Provisions became increasingly scarce, life more and more 
impossible. 

eleft the town, taking with us those of our servants whom 
we could trust, and went to live in a flat on the outskirts of 
Miskhor, where the Reds seldom came. My wife had succeeded 
in getting me a permit to reside there, on which I was described, 
not as a General, but as a “certified engineer”. 

Our neighbours were Tartars, sworn enemies of the Reds, 
and most of them were Mahometans; they used to warn us of 
the ay ost danger which threatened us. 

We lived like this for about three months. Then we heard 
a rumour that the Germans were in the Ukraine, We saw less 
and less of the Reds, and one fine morning, we saw a column 
en soldiers on the highway, marching in good 


10 


Deel 2 as I 24 2 sec the r master of Russia, 
my country disgra was nevertheless happy at being 
free from the humiliating yoke of those blockheaded idiots, 


6 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL D 


II. In THE UKRAINE AND Warre RUSSIA 
iye the Germans their duc: th 

decency and did their best to avoid ae Ne inka. With 
of the country they were about to occupy. All th abitan, 
and orders of their predecessors were annu ed, exce decree, 
ission to leave ot enter the Crimea the ON 


concerning perm! 
The Kommrandatar helped those who had been robbed 
their possessions back again, and had those Red thieves get 


murderers who had not been able to get clear in ti 
and delivered up to justice. The 216 Bolshevists ©? arrested 
they gave a helping hand were the leaders and thee bom 
> we to return to Moscow safe and sound. “Se they 
e day after the troops arrived, delegates from the G 
Command presented themselves at Dulber Castl 
the members of the Imperial Family were in Fs, Where al 
requested Grand Duke Nicholas to receive th residence, and 
Duke sent his answer by his aide-d pempe em. The Grand 
ret himself as a prisoner of war, i piiewedl — le —_ 
isod to obey, but if their visi ’ at 
95 1 — F only, he 
e Prussian off j s 
lopesial Highoess’s an: replied that they quite appreciated hi 
an 5 er, and that they were at hi Pr 
whe to 75 a bodyguard at his disposal t F genie 
Russian soldiers FF 
r ith him were quite sufficient. 
Mother came over n ig normal course. The Empr 
Princess Dolgorouky ** ri day to see her old ‘end. 
pee se hours at a time Gram 175 ai on a seat on the 
ne : 7 e Ni 
I 5 self up in the house. e ee paly 
Lithuania, and 2 Kies to go and inspect an estate we had i 
see Skotopadsky, wh was on the way, I decided t - 4 
(Chief of State) of ie had just been proclaim Be Stop and 
at when w af 
At a op the Russo- bain Cae officers, and 
in the Horse Cee the World War he had 55 ` 
months h dards and I had k a colonel 
e had risen been a ma 
his ch; to the rank a major. After a few 
chief- of taff of ma 
Now I was curio or. general, and I had 
us to see him at work. 


I must 


ni 4 


UNDER THE YOKE OF BOLSHEVISN a 


rey, the cradle of Russian Orthodox trans- 
Kiev into the "ancient capital of the Ukraine” and the town 
es of the neu Hetman, but it had changed very little. 
155 cople continued to speak Russian, al h the sign- 
and street names were written up in a tale which 

her the Russians nor the Little Russians understood. The 
— had given instructions that the official lan was 
* the Ukrainian tongue, The best of the thing was that the 
although of Little Russian descent, could underftand 

neither the Little Russian language nor his own native tongue, 


é ed r * 

Skoropadsky"s words were; I am relying on you: 
sould you like to be my chicf-of-atalf? We will soon bie a 
—. 5 Ukrainian army.” 


Į answered that since I had no Stake in the Ukraine and 
knew nothing about local conditions, it would not be tight 
for me to occupy the position, 

The two of us talked at great length. I was sure that the 
World War, which was Sill going on, would end in the defeat 
of Germany, and that the Germans, who were supporting the 

would be forced to evacuate Russia. Once this 


mare, since Germany was lending her support for i 
selfish reasons, she would never tolerate e A 
grong Ukrainian arm 

Sk „ however, held very to the 
opinion. According to him, the Ukraine, supported by Austria 
and the Slay countries, would become very and play 
a leading part in the future. 


We returned to this question many times, I discussed it with 
le who were familiar with the situation, and in the end 
was convinced that Sef mimi was not sincere in his 
venture. Therefore I turned down all his proposals. 
Kiev was packed full of officers, who had escaped death 
some miracle. Almost the whole of my 7th division was 
too. As I have already said, I had not been in at the 
FCC 
I learnt from them how things had gone since I had left them. 
told me of the outrages they had had to endure, and of 
the life of martyrdom they had led. Most of the officers had 
been loyal to their duty and their colours until the last, and 
had been present at the dissolution of their regiments and the 


. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL > 


4 
They had watched the final 
colla of the Army : - rhad li i 
of the wosthy fellows with whom they ved ike bei 


ing their joys and sorrows; men who, her, 
r at thet 


And now these last fragments of the Great Russian A 
had met at Kiev at the risk of their lives. r 
Some had come on foot, others by railway, and ajy * 
been hounded about like wild animals. Some hoped to go a! 
fighting for Russia under the Ukrainian flag, others to bet du 
the region of the Don, where the ‘Cossacks : Dees 
Bolshevism and elected the Carit General Krasnoy a 
Ataman. The rest intended to join the Volunteer Army, which 
it was said, was in course of formation. The names of 
Alexciev, Kornilov, and Denikin, were enough to create the 
belief that the undertaking was a serious one, 
The flag was certainly in good hands, but there was nei 
= Tre 
not 


unition, arms, nor money. The section of the popular; 
— which this new seer aod have been formed 
yet made up its mind, Were we justified in utting our faith 
in an un ing which had such a slight ce Of success> 
General Svetchin had recently arrived from the Don; he 
was very well informed as to the Situation, and caused me 
much distress. I heard from him that Krasnov, ng had been 
ointed Ataman, was doing everything in his power to 
hahen the resurrection of the Army, but that the Cos 
who were more chauvinigtic than ever, refused to have officers 
in their ro if they were not Cossacks by birth. 
After omilov's death and his defeat at the Kuban, it was 
y possible that the reorganization of the Army should go 
On, espe y as it was rumoured that the Generals were ar 
from being in agreement with one another, 


igadice-Genesal casants”, It was led th 
T a of the 7th division, Odinteyy of whom 
jala the Bain ore, and who had been one of the first to 
One fine day my door ed to admit thi J 
sce to eg and with outed fe “What 2 
hope you are well heard that you had been killed, 


UNDER THE YOKE of BOLSHEVISM 
y up without shaking hands with kim ‘ 
12 thank 4 ou. I won't ask how you are, because I kn 
gat yous, ste COIG very well in the service of your new 
intzov interrupted me. “Every man 
odia before 8 is aged. { don't care * — 3 
heal . 4 t ue ot men I li P 
i heat what I have to say,” a2 ike and repot, You 
An eee 
have myseſt tot my co 111 
pai my life, for I have sacrificed my ime Nan, 
“Excuse my interrupting you, ut Í don’t quite follow. 
You ate saying that you sacrificed your honour aud went over 
to the Bolsheviks for the good of your country?” 
“Yes, Iam a monarchist, but to achieve monarchy we mak 
go through anarch y, and serve the Bolshevists that we may 


overthrow s : 
“And you think you can work with Trotsky, who is the 
id representative of our enemies? I suppose you realize that 
p a German spy?” 


“He is not the only one; but there is a topsy-turvy scale of 
values in politics, and ends justify means.” 2 ~~ 
I opened the door. If that is all you have got to say to me, 


please get out, * 
I will not say much more about my short Say in White 
Russia. The Germans were in occupation there too, and their 
spline was much severer here than in the Crimea. The da 

after my arrival, Lieutenant Ohnemuller, the commandin 
officer of the platoon which was quartered on us, 

himself to me; he was a tery men of good family, intelligent, 
cultured, and very well bred. He noticed my setters, and asked 
me if I went in for shooting and if I expected to get any here. 
I told him I had hoped for some, but that it was impossible, 
as — has — forbiddden. The next day he ep a 
some cartridges, We went out shooting together more 
once. I hive antes been able to understand those Chauvinists 
who as an enemy every man belonging to the nation 
with which his country is at war. You ght your enemy’s 
jeg Shere es can tespect the individuals who compose it. 

Í heard that a White Army was being formed in the Don 
and in Caucasia, so I set out for Kiev again. 

At Kiev I received confirmation of the news. One of my 

E 


— . — 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
d * s 
friends had just — Seow nea The 4: 
11 — 1 to Yalta, where I gave my children into ; 
care of their grandmother, after wi ch I set out for be 
on the Don, accompanied by my wife. who wanted to pe 
nursing the a as she ae Ta we Great we 
, four years earlier, thie ma 
The vaf a carat of Horse Guards to go and 


d of my squad , 
3 T è town had been decked with fags, t 


so that they could continue the struggle for their honour, their 
CS 
to thi t Russian men, their own comrad 

former days, wete trampling this freedom and honour —— 
foot! It is true that the enemy had brought things to this 
e 

Germany had fail to conquer by force of arms, but had 
Succeeded in corrupting her enemy. It is maintained that 


uses unworthy means always a bad 
hadow of Civ War fell re ation. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN 
CAUCASIA 


We sailed on the King Albert. It was crowded. Since the 
Volunteers had been occupying the port of Novorossiisk and 
the town of Ekaterinodar, the ¢ who had fied from the 
Red Terror had gone back home. There were a large number 
of Germans amongst the passengers. I made friends with a 
German professor, an inspector of the military hospitals used 
by the Army of Occupation. | 

The ‘rest * did not N prohibit officers 
from g olunteer Army, but in actual practice th 
put al kinds of difficulties in the wa ; At Kerteh our passports 
were examined, As I was with the professor, they did 
not even glance at our papers. 

Roftov was full of people and humming with life. The 
town had become a 3 capital for Southern Russia 
as Kiev had for the Ukraine, The Streets were full of life, and 
nothing had changed. Even the policemen at the railway 
ation Still wore their old uniforms. Some German uniforms 
in the Streets were the only things that reminded one of the 
real situation. 


found several acquaintances easily enough, but only with the 
greatest difficulty did I find a lodging. 

I knew neither the chief · of · taff at Supreme Headquarters 
1 ized one or two 
old comrades amongst the officers. They told me that Kornilov 
had tried to find me, and had written to me twice from 
Petersburg. Neither of his letters had reached me. 

Whea I arrived, the Volunteer Army did not exceed thirty- 
five thousand men and eighty guns. The infantry, artillery, and 

wineers were almost entirely composed of officers, the cavalry, 
with the exception of two regiments which were attached to 
repr thea of Kuban Cossacks and Circassians. Most of 
the were unknown to me. 

5: 


— n a a 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
ammunition the army had were tho, 


arms and The re-equippin 
the enemy 1ta 8 Wag dont 


from 
i had captured le. Our enemy n 
st the expense of bene guns 1117 had — reserve getty 
shows Army at their were badly ont ty 
of the old 2” ther hand they were y Organiz 


+ 


in. The former Was se k 
= Nins kin through aroi met hin 
— . in Manchuria, during the Japanese War, ang r- 
Se . Headquarters. He received me in the presence — 
General Romanovsky, his chief-of-staff. 

Be paras eek: beard and moustache. He gave me the 
impression of being thoughtful, resolute, well balanced, and 
a thoroughgoing Russian. He was known to be courage 

well versed in military science. Durin 

onal Government he had 


¢ reminded me of our mecting in Manchuria, and told me 
that Kornilov had spoken of me many times. 
“Well, General,“ he said, “what are we going to do? 
I really do not know what you propose. Our effective force 
is ae eu .* 
“As Your Excellency knows,” I replied, “in 1917 I was 
commanding a cavalry troop, but back in 1914 I comma 
a squadron. I am ca hg 705 old to do so ain” — 
t nonsense,” he said, “a squadron! If you would be 


„That's splendid. The General” —indicating Romanovsky— 


for he had a wa of 
Would always word sy 8 Straight at anyone, and 


ee 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA T 


ET prigadier-general, as I was expecting, bor as lieutenant- 
5 Ihe next ad [ went to fad my divisian, which was 


ent. As far ás 
with great wheat-sheaves, orchards, and kitchen gardens over- 
olden melans. The large villages, the white 


with g 
foes with their red-tiled roofs, the churches with their 
domes, and the Seam-mills all bore witness to the 


Faith and seiner | of the countrys 
was guiding us told us of the horrors perpetrated by the Reds; 


he ET that the people blessed the day when the Volunteer 
had come to help them get rid o! their oppressors. 

in a village I ran into a platoon of Cossacks. They turned 
out to be the escort of the Licutenant-General | was to succeed. 
told me that the division was in the thick of an attack. 
We hastily swallowed a mouthful of food, and then got into 
che saddle again and went to join the troops. I discovered 
several old comrsdes-in-arms amongst the officers and 
soldiers. In the evening we went along to my Headquarters, 
and I spent the night working with my chief-of-staff. 

Technical equipment was almost entirely lacking. We had 
nothing but 2 wireless apparatus; no telegraph and no tele- 
phone. We re-equipped ourselves with munitions at the 
enemy's expense, though occasionally the General Staff sent 
us cartridges and shells from the Don. 

For our Medical Service, we had a surgeon and two Sisters 
of Charity, but there was no linen for dressing wounds and 
po drugs. The casualties were enormous, and the faPs were 
filled by volunteers who had to go Straight into battle without 
imi ini idual soldier fought well, 


any preliminary training. Each indivi 
Army left much to be desired. 


but as a nee entity the 

My whole division’ numbered only two thousand five 
hundred men and three field batteries. 

As the land was won back, the village assemblies met and 
eleted communal councils which took over the commissariat 
and means of transport. They also di justice, and 
handed over Bolshevists to the authorities. This gave rise to 
many abuses; too often the people used their authority to 


square private accounts and take vengeance on their enemies. 
But we had to restore a certain amount of order somehow. 


To make matters worse, we were short of staff and time, yet, 


ý MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL S 


although this semblance of order was very im 
better an anarchy. jae: ir 
The Bolshevists had twelve to fifteen thousang be 
twenty-five or thirty guns, and several hundred horse” 
were well provided with ammunition and technici equi’ * 
The Red soldiers themselves fought Well, but tE inmens 
manders were hopelessly inadequate. y Cir 
To our right, in the Maikop district, Genera) Pok 
ca division was operating, but our COMMUNIcation Yi 
impertect. To our left, along the line of the Kavkaz, 
Armavir railway, Colonel Drosdovsk S infantry diviaio kan, 
in constant communication with us. Our division wa, tod 
back the enemy, who were occupying Ourop on the An 
side of the river. Othe, 
The enemy's position which we had to take was bear 
village of Mikhailovskaia, protected by the deep river Lit 
on the left bank of which the enemy held a brid head 
€ of hills, and swamps. As, in addition, they had far mon 
8 than we, and were abundantl supplied with amman 
tion, which we lacked altogether, all our efforts to advang 
Were in vain. I made up my mind to alter things. A brigade 
defeated the * and succeeded in advancing through 
Mikhailovskaia an occupying the line of the Armay. : 
Tuapse railway, But this did not lead to anythi g. The Reds | 
wheeled round, and by using a large n t Of trains and | 
armoured motor-lorries forced the brigade to retreat. 
For three weeks we tried in vain to drive of the enemy. 
During this time Supreme Headquarters bombarded me with 
dispatches demandin “energetic action and an attack at all 
costs.” But in spite of my urgent entreaties they did not send 
me supplies of ammunition, 

i tember there were some unimportant engage ' 
ments; sometimes the enemy harassed us, sometimes we i 
upon them. Our total losses were large. In An and 
. division lost two hundred and sixty and | 
two thousand four hundred and sixty men, that is to say, oa: 

were 


hundred per cent. of its effective force, The gaps 
immediately with recruits from the recently freed territory. 
In the middle of the night of October rst I was told that 
the enemy had blown up the railway bridge and were con- 
their forces on the right bank of the Laba. I gave 


the order for an offensive, 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA jj 


dom that day on operations took place 1 
n and were of the kind in which — Ser toe 
mant than numerical strength. We won Victory after 
vic ry: : 
we advanced in double column, On Od 
„gjkhailovskaia, wher e an enormous EnA fal 9 
receive me. The “ancients” (as the Caucasians call the most 
resposted men of their country) offered me bread and salt 
„ccording to custom. Many of them wept as they told me of 
they had had to suffer from the Reds. The Bolshevists had 
uken away with them as hostages the riche? men in the 
Ji&ri&, also the family of the inspector of the local school and 
‘est. Several “ancients” had been shot on the eve of the 


departure of the Re 

Ofober ıt was the date of the village church festival. 
t went to Mass, and it was more than ordinarily moving. 
Everyone prayed with unusual fervour and affecting sincerity. 

I came out of church I found a brigade of Cossacks and 

Circassians in the market square, On their left flank, under 
the green Mahometan ag was a detachment of Circassian 
ancients” who had come down from the mountains to join us. 
The aowls had suffered cruelly at the hands of the Bolshevitts: 
several had been burnt out, and many Circassians had been 
tortured and shot. In one of the jo À half a score of men 
had been buried alive. The “ancients” told me that they were 
putting their sons under my command, though they themselves 
Eubel to return to their villages; they promised, however, that 
they would come at the first appeal and fight side by side with 
their sons, I thanked them, and at their earnest request handed 
over to them a couple of dozen prisoners, that they might bring 
them to justice on the spot where their crimes had been 
committed. But I had scarcely set off with my troops before 
the Circassians threw themselves upon the prisoners and cut 
them to pieces before the eyes of the vi 3 

In a neighbouring village I came upon the Cossacks of 
Poksovsky’s division robbing the villagers, To my indignation 
I perceived several Cossack officers amongst the marauders. 
I sent for them and told them that if I found them still within 
the boundaries of my division in half an hour’s time oer 
would be shot. In half an hour there was not a ingle 
in the village. I reported their conduct to General Pokrovsky. 


t Mghometan mountain villages. TRANSLATOR. 


56 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Unfortunately, I suspected (and my suspicions were soon jus- 
tified) that the General not only took no measures against the 
marauders, but even tacitly encouraged them. The Cossacks had 
themselves been robbed of everything they possessed, so that it 
was difficult, indeed impossible, to rid them of their desire to get 
back an equivalent wherever they could find it. 

Considerable sums of money were to be found on almost every 
enemy, the baggage was packed full of all manner of things, from 
sugar and tobacco to furs, rugs, cut-glass, furniture, and pianos. 
At the beginning of the Civil War, before the Bolshevists had 
begun raising recruits, their army had been composed solely of 
escaped convicts, out-and-out riff-raff and the scum of the old 
Army. They had robbed and massacred the populace, killed off 
the wounded, and raped the women. When our units saw this, 
they could not be made to behave decently. Since they had no 
base and were completely surrounded by the enemy, they could 
not take any prisoners either. 

Destitute of everything, they re-equipped themselves at the 
expense of the countryside, showing not the slightest respect 
for other people's property. And it was impossible, at any rate 
at the beginning of the Civil War, to prevent such outrages. I 
contented myself with demanding that the booty seized from the 
enemy should be divided equally between all the soldiers, and 
I appointed supervisory committees. Afterwards, when, thanks 
to the help of the Allies, the Army could obtain its supplies in a 
normal manner, I arranged that all the spoils of war should be 
handed over to the Commissariat. But from the first I had been 
ruthlessly opposed to all marauding, and had caused offenders 
to be arrested. 

General Pokrovsky (and, unfortunately, he was not the only 
one) either could not or would not follow my example, and con- 
sequently I had to give up the idea of prohibiting this lawlessness. 
Everything was considered permissible. The result of this state of 
affairs was disastrous. 

The enemy put their infantry into wagons and retreated all 
along the line, covering forty to fifty-five kilometres a day. One of 
our columns attacked them fiercely, and captured their baggage, 
a number of machine-guns, and some ammunition. 

I slept in the village of Costantinovka. The master of the house, 
a fine old man with a long white beard, threw himself at my 
feet and wept. He was a very rich man, and was held in great 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA 57 


respect throughout the district. Three of his sons had fled from 
the Reds, two had been shot, and his eldest son had been hiding 
in a cave with several friends for four months. He took me to 
see them. The sight of the poor devils made me shudder. The old 
man himself had had to be hidden in the straw for days to save 
his life. He discovered that one of his fugitive sons had been in 
my escort, another in one of my regiments. It is impossible to 
describe the father's joy. 

In the morning the troops continued the pursuit. I remained 
behind for an hour or two, as I had orders to give, then I got 
into a car and went to rejoin one of my columns. I found the 
men having a meal. I learnt that the other column was fighting 
with the Red rearguard six kilometres farther on. I got into my 
car again and went to join it. 

‘The officer in charge of the column, Colonel Toporkov, and 
his General Staff were on a hillock behind which a battery was 
posted. A couple of hundred paces away, two Cossack squadrons 
were covering it. The enemy were in a hollow about one thousand 
five hundred paces away, their shells almost reached us. I got out 
of the car and went over to the battery with two of my orderlies. 
I had scarcely reached it when I heard a cry of "the cavalry!" 
and saw my Cossacks gallop up furiously, hotly pursued by a 
great mob of enemy cavalry. The battery commander ordered an 
enfilade, but it did not stop the Reds. The Cossacks who were 
covering the artillery had come up already, the enemy at their 
heels. We attempted to stop them in vain. The whirlwind of 
horsemen swooped down upon us. 

The enemy fell upon the battery, one of the guns was 
done for. I saw an artillery officer fire point-blank at a Red, 
but another of them struck him down with one blow of his 
sword. Colonel Toporkov, surrounded by foes, was slashing 
to right and left. I ran to my car, but it had been wrecked. 
The chauffeur and his assistants were a long way off. I hurried 
into a maize field. On both sides of me Cossacks were dashing 
by; the gunners, too, were in flight. Shooting and slashing 
was still going on near the battery. An officer offered me his 
horse, but I refused it. As he insisted, I directed him to go to 
the village and bring back my escort and my horses which he 
would find there. He set off at the gallop. I kept on running. 
Looking behind me, I saw three Reds galloping up. One of 


i MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL S 
} , 
t up with one of our foot-soldiers and a 

Wer doen but the soldier fell upon his horse Pty 
quarters, and the two other Reds fell upon him. I Wana 
rush to his aid, but I was unarmed, I had no Sword, ang t 
given my revolver to an officer who was Without One. At f 
moment an ambulance car passed me at full speed, | it 
it as fat as I could, and, mana yng tu catch u With it, ler 
on board. I was beside myself. The loss of the bare ry * 
flight of the Cossacks, the failure of my efforts to 2 
them, all contributed to overwhelm me. My men no Inn D 

isted. 
“We passed a soldier riding one horse and leadin mother 
I took n, mounted, and hurried on to meet the Wacky | 
had sent for, A brigade appeared at the ttot, 1 Ordered ij 
deploy, and we went in search of the enemy; but the 
had already fallen back, taking with them two guns, my cas 
and some clothes which they had stripped from the baro 
ot our dead. They followed the line of their general retreat 
crossed the River Ouroup, and entrenched themselves On 
the tight bank. s 

Pokrovsky’s division was mancuvting on our ri ht, and 
on its right flank was Colonel Chkouro and his 
To our left, between the Ouroup and the Kuban, 
Kasanovitch’s division Was to try and force the River Ouroup 
and throw the enem back on * farther bank of the Kubas. 

For two weeks all our efforts were in vain, 

On October roth the cnemy crossed the Ouroup and 
— an offensive against the junction of my division and 


The engagement was a brisk one, and lated for twelve 
hours. There were heavy los 


nighe, We perceived that the enemy were beginnin 


— 


and 2 large number of machine-guns, As a final result, the 
. vacuated the whole of the left 
u è 


On October zand J ed ill kais, 
where fighting was sill ia — vege afd N 


pruon üd hurrahs ran t É ks. 
ASClousness of victory 0 cb arican Cossack ran 


THE UBERATION OP NORTHERN CAUCASIA 


19 
neous birth to confidence in the g mmander, and creates 

+ bond which is the Strength of armies From thar moment 
on 1 “held” my units, and our division knew no more 
gefests. “ai : , 

One section of the enemy was in flight along 
track towards Stavropol, the other towards Arr 
my brigades had Sarted of in pursuit, the other went to 
reinſotec the neighbouring division, Í remained in the village 
of Ouspenskaia with two regiments. In that night's work we 

| gd taken considerable amount of booty from the enemy, 
besides many prisoners, and it all had to be cleared up. 

| My division, on its formation, had been reinforced by the 
pairis of a Cossack infantry division. There was nothing left 

| of it but a score of two of men. All the rest had been killed. 

For a long time I had been wanting to reinforce it, but how? 


the railway 
Armavir. One of 


decided to make my first attempt with our prisoners, 

| ordered three hundred and seventy of the Bolshevists to 
line up. They were all officers and non-commissioned officers, 
znd I had them shot on the spot. Then I told the rest that they 
roo deserved death, but that I had let those who had misled 
them take the responsibility for their treason, because I wanted 
to give them a chance to atone for their crime and prove their 
loyalty to their country. 

Weapons were distributed to them immediately, and two 
weeks = they went into the fighting-line and behaved with 
great courage. Later this battalion became one of the bes 
in the whole Army, and covered itself with glory, 

We continued to advance on Stavropol, fighting almo& 
every day. Things grew warm not far from the little railway 
ation of Pelagiada, some kilometres from the town. The 
enemy was firmly entrenched, having beaten back our infantry 
division. I wheeled my forces during the night, and at dawn 
fell upon the Reds from the iver of wood, They broke and 
took to their heels in a panic, pursued by my regiments. 
Followed by several — I reached the suburbs of the 
town, where the fighting had already begun. The Reds had 
entrenched themselves in a convent, which we outflanked. 

Some Cossacks and horses were killed. I deployed m 
squadrons, drew my sword, and putting myself at their head. 
led the charge, The Streets and the cloister were cleared of 


Reds and we entered the suburbs, cutting down anyone who 
tried to stop us. 


—— ͤͤẽi 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL — 
fe 


in the precincts of the 
— a — — s in. The cloister door o dontent 
* ana our followed by nuns, Bullets Were still Tainted 
hates crashing against rhe walls, but — r and nuns d 8 
not seem to notice them. pen Age oa t rounded, — 
gave them food and drink, whilst the pric sprinkled the 


Cossacks with holy water. It was a beautiful and tou ching 


* i e discovered two officers who had 
In the cloisters we discove vo off suc. 

: ing from the town. The Father Superior ha 
. sien op — and when the Reds had come to the 
convent they had sot even suspected their identity, 

On November and I entered Stavropol to the sound 
bugles, followed by my escort. There was Still skitmichin 
going on in some directions. The Streets were littered With 
corpses, dead horses, and overtumed wagons. As they hearg 
the sound of the bugles, the citizens came out ot doors ween; 7 
clapping their bands, cheering, and bringing the Cossa 
wine, cigarettes, and money. One ald lady caught hold of my 
stirrup and tried to kiss my hand. nne l 

The town had been through a terrible time, The Bolshevig 
authorities had fallen out amongst themselves and had shor 
the commander of their troops. Anarchy was at its height. 
One and all were free to rob, pillage, and shoot. In the court- 


But it was difficult to re-establish even a semblance of order, 
for passion and hatred was stil] running wild. On the following 
day the Circassians broke into a 1 ital where several 
hundred of the enemy’s wounded were š i 


a 
d — 1 
* i 


A. 
k 


v 
a" 4 

hi 7 
— 


nr 
pi 


= 
F) 
* 


— Ld 
— 
2 


* 
A 


> 


$ 
k 
7 
F 
* 


GENERAL BARON P, N. WRANGEL, COMMANDER-IN-CIHEF OF THE 


RUSSIAN NATIONAL ARMY 


— 


py sy heey 
wat eer 


GENERAL 


AND 


RANGEL,  KRIVOCHH IN, 


CHATILOY 


GENERA 


-_ n 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAU 
1 


been executed. When the G í 
aneler but I do not know what — te I handed 


jj, Is THE “Nocats” STEPPES 


were ret | 7 
. 5 reating northwards, We followed hard 
night, after a fairly lively engagement i . 
had taken thousands of prisoners and ithe — — 
by an enemy division, I received a dispatch ordering me to 
and meet zeneral Denikin, who had just arrived at R — 
vianaia Station. | rode over there on horseback, The —.— 
fight was trickling through a thick mist. Villages, trees, and 
had all taken on the livid hue of corpses which . 
r $ ? gave 
a weird, dismal a pearance. The road was not onl 
with the dead bodies of men and horses, but was also 
churned up by the rain. As I was splashing through a large 
pool m horse reared. A grinning corpse was Staring at me 
its head alone visible, for the water hid its body, A few * 
farther on an arm was Stretched out towards me. My horse 
trembled, snorted with fear, and shied from side to side. 

The General thanked me for my division's success, and 
told me that I had been appointed to the command of a 
cavalry cotps consisting of my division and Colonel Ulagay's 
znd division. 

The Reds were retreating, but nevertheless they contested 
every inch with stubborn tenacity. My men were í good way 
ahead of the other troops. One night the Reds succeeded in 
wheeling round on us, and one of their platoons entered the 
village where we were slecping. I had only thirty Cossacks 
with me, the rest having been left behind to cover the train, 
and thirty mote men in my escort. There was not the smallest 
chance of putting up a resistance. If the Reds had acted more 
boldly they could have taken us all, But the hesitated, con- 

ing themselves to shooting down on us, and could not make 

their minds to attack. Our transport was ready for instant 
re, We dressed hastily, the horses were saddled, and 

we left the village at full speed. Unfortunately, the oppa 
8 to two regiments, and also my wife’s ambulance- 
cars, fell into the hands of the enemy. The doctor managed to 
escape, but one of the sisters was taken prisoner. Providence 
Was watching over my wife: the evening before, she had left 


ions OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
M rder to convey the wounded fr 


town. - N 
MS feanwhile aR roughout thë day, but by “VENA we 


1 d 5 y 

Į took the neoessaty nr Obolensky, my old comrade ; 
1 Ulagay. During the ni ein 

shi A assin 
we reached à ps eoe we heard sounds of firing in One 


Pening 


horse close up to mine, R “f command pou to go back jn 


lop by my side, 
sound, 


remained on our left flank, and at dawn, before 

the enemy had finished concentrating, we Seared. We pene- 

trated the 2 front line and the Reds broke, making off 

at top speed. Most of them were slain, and many were 
drowned in the river. 

decided Bed pr- from the advance my troops had made, 

and lend a to General Kasanovitch, who was operating 


on November zznd I turned on the Reds and attacked them 
from the rear, The | scattered; we took two thousand 
jae, The guns, forty ine· guns, and all their 
ry orl t evening we took up our position alongside 


On the morning of the 24th the en i 
N em , 
for a ny obtained ‘reinfo z 8 — offensive 

rok Wing, and came tight up to the railroad. 


_ 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA F 
idday our first division mad 
pe RS gde a mcr 1u 
ende more prisoners, a battery complete with horses nd 
—— ae omen wa — = 
a result, Mentioned in di 
— ptomoted to the rank of Licutenant-Genest ches. * 
f requested that Colonels Toporkev and Ulagay be promoted 
so the rank of General. Both Were excellent officers. Toporkey 
` simple Cossack, had begun his career as 3 Private. Endowed 
with an innate flair for military matters, uncommon courage 
icity and trustworthy steadiness, he lived the same life 
‘< his men, slept in the same room, and i 

s every order had to be obeyed, and ways was, cost what 


Hi 
+ might. But sometimes he expected too 
it mig n | much, and sacrificed 


eed Ulagay had a much more complex nature, vigorous 
and ambitious to a fault, but honest and noble-hearted, a man 
of exemplary courage and great military talents. He had a high 
reputation amongst his officers and Cossacks. He understood 
the art of getting out of difficult situations, and knew how to 
take advantage of them; he could also take the initiative when 
necessary. Though he was a cavalry officer of great merit, he 
nevertheless had his faults; his was an unbalanced nature, and 
he was extremely touchy, His mood would change easily from 
enthusiasm to apathy. When he was be inning a task, he 
seemed to look for obstacles which would hinder its com- 
pletion; but once he had made up his mind, he would carry 
out his decision brilliantly. 

In the course of the 2 few months my command had 
teceived considerable reinforcements. In spite of heavy losses, 
its Strength was almost normal. We were well supplied with 
artillery, technical equipment, telephones, telegraphs, and so 
on, which we had taken from the enemy. When the Reds had 
succeeded in making themselves masters of the Kuban district, 
they had had recourse to conscription there. Now these forced 
recruits were deserting en masse, and coming over to us to 
defend their homes. They were good fighters, but once their 
own village was cleared of Reds, many of them Jeft the ranks 
to cultivate their land once more. , 

lt was unlikely that the enemy would be able to continue 

ofensive for some time, for they had been completely 
talized by these last defeats. Nor were we in a position 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

= j had reorganized, 
i ce until we gani i 

4 conan One aie to ask the 1 foe 
i wey go to Supreme cadquaxtets an / confer with ve 
General Staff on questions aes uture action, ete. 
which had on. undeci ikin’s authorization, I del tated 
* to Ulagay, who had already been mad, > 
e co my wife, who had to attend to * 


; ff with € 
r at Ekatctinodat, where Supreme 


ere situated. ; 
could not have received me more warmly, 


j flattering things, and acquiesced in all m 
arar oles me 5 details with Geers 
Romanorsky, his chief-of-taff. He also Was very polite 
but persistently refused to say yes Or no, neither r using 
nor promising anything; his colleagues followed his 


le. s 
— was snowed under with work: there was a 
deluge of waite-papet. Forgetting ot holding over the execu. 
tion of less urgent measures, Supreme Headquarters was busy 
with questions which, though perhaps essential, were out of 
date so far as the present situation was concerned: they were 
revising and claborating regulations and organizing com- 
mittees of Study for the great military formations. 

I was invited to sit on one of these committees which dealt 
with questions concerning the cavalry. In my opinion, ‘a 
Strong cavalry force is even more necessary in a Civil War 
than at any other time. The cavalry of the Volunteer Army 
consisted solely of Cossacks, who, once their native village 
was won back, would fight fat less whole-heartedly. 

It was absolutely necessary to recreate the old regular 
cavalry, which was, if I may say so, the finest in the world, 
We had the necessary cadres at hand, and also hundreds of old 


advisers were 2 yr gu they were indiferent, not to 

ca ot organizing regular cavalry units. 
2 uh a memorandum in which I dealt with the question 
thoroughly, and submitted it to the committee, which accepted 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASLA 
7 


the district Rada. The Riche | 
At 1 the Ataman already in ` s 8 was 

President of the Rada. P 7 Left’s, one 
pyt the Cossack units and — ae Was at its height, 
bo ret 0 it MF Ot the population were 

tical Strife y in the rear of an 

5 ian was war to the death, could ane be anth * 

ų injurious. In my opinion it was mow ur 
Peamander-in-Chict should do something 888 * 
little firmness would be enough; too much abStinence 
reef action yone — 2 indicate weakness, 

| broached the su to General Denikin, but he 
i deaf oh ; General Pokrovsky and apa Chkouro, wha 

rou un e Co ssacks, 5 im: 
as Denikin had his own opinion. Rn 

Colonel Fili nov was te ected; he was ingenious and 
qotious, but lacking in resolution and incapable of coping 
with the circumstances, as latet events showed. 

The campaign which Generals Alexciev and Kornilov had 
undertaken grew in extent and gained Stability; the Allies 
seemed to understand it. Their sr apy a 
in Exaterinodat—the English General Poole and the French 
Captain Fouquet. They had come to inspect the troops and 
see what they lacked, 

On November 11th the Armistice was signed between the 
Allies and Germany. The German Army which was occupyin 
Russia collapsed and fied hurriedly, selling its arms 
ammunition, for it was in with the Bolshevit 

j for it also i feéted 

ison. 

j the Ukraine things fell out as we had foreseen. The 
Hetman Skoropadsky had been put in power by the Germans, 
and had maintained himself solely by their support; now he 
decamped and took refuge in any. One of our best 
Generals, Count Keller, was assassinated at Kiev The 
officers who had managed to escape went to Caucasia and the 
Don to continue the struggle. eral Krasnov was there; 
having fooled the Germans and wormed all he could out of 
them, he was now treating directly with the Allies. He and 
Denikin had not yet managed to come to an agreement, and 
each was negotiating separately. 


' The local Diet for the Kuban district —TRAxstaTor. 
* Kiev hed once wore fallen into the bands of the Bolsbevits —Taanstarton. 
F 


roms OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

were furious. They were saying chat 
. ould have to submit to Denikin. At Krasnov, 

forasquarrersthey were probably saying the same things aboy, 
ca ins 


General Denikin, r 

& Bolshevism p in othe its of 

— Anil Koltchak’s Army was fighting in Siber k 

— Miller's in the north; General Youdenitch was ; 

to — one on the Baltic. It seemed as though the dawn o H 
i àt hand. : 

94 a kad [ was not doing any good at Headquarters 


mand. 
and 9988 had concentrated fresh troops 


pok the initiative, attacked General Kasanovit 3 
= corps, and forced it to retreat to Kalaous. I obtained 
mission from Headquarters to go to his relief. Genial 
Toporkoy with his six regiments was to deflect the enemy 
attack them. è l 
On the 2oth I heard that the Commander-in-Chief had left 
Headquarters with the Allied Missions to go to the front. 
The same day Denikin telephoned me. He told me that 
Kasanovitch had informed him that in view of the Critical 
situation in which his column—which was on the march— 
found itself, he could not possibly concentrate his troops for 
Allied inspection. 
The General said to me: “Can I bring them along to you?” 
“With pleasure, Your Excellency,” I replied. 
“What can you show them?” he asked. 
I can only show them,” I said, “how we pound the Reds. 
mone arrive to-night, so as to be able to march with the 
I spent the night making the n ar 
drawin 2 ccessary ements, and 
which had a detailed report of the Situation and of she — 
Bren to the troops, with dia- 
grams; l had the whole thing trans! explanatory 
French, then zent a Picket of ho ated into English and 


Was Coming into the 


y was still young į d 
sun, and Ung, it was raining, 

Jets cone the pone tte was a watery 
the bare, ck, — far as the eye could see stretch 
Stuck fag į steppe 

fast in the mud show eee tthe 2 


ü MEN 
Denikin's Headquarters 


** THE LIBERATION OF NORTHER cay 


Many were dumped 6) 
sport. Ped there. a] 
out 2 Toporkov had 28 them to thon ho 
ig IE CAH which could og PRED hn 
ast — J. The mud was certainly terrible. re bases of 
a culty z meta Kd horses, Platounes : 
bs fy as four o Clock that same aftern 
As Sich we were marching managed to wa an Suma 
u apd open fire. We had eaten nothing for tw 2 5 
had been in the saddle most of the time. The Com ours, 
0d jef, his Staff, and the foreign agents were un, mander- 


war and were feeli quite weak. I a ph — 


* sine of 
Sat mn ee eee 
t 


ps. I left my escort and m hief-of. | k 
My chiet· o taff was under orden ut uf Poe 


ind to turn the enemy y of : — village. Of chem 
column, en route tor the v » filed 
er A Chief, wha shouted a few wands of oe 
to them as they passed, 
¢ regiments deployed in battle order under en 
sod climbed the sight bank of the river. Rather a — — 
to their tight, firing could be heard; on our left our 2nd 
division could be seen a acting x 
À regiment co y a young man who had only the 
evening before been made a colonel, was climbing the hill 
I shouted to him: “Remember that you earned the rank of 
colonel.” He immediately gave the word for the charge, and 
off they č shed at full s The firing was terrible, the horses 
constantly npea fell on the urned-up ground, but 
nothing could stop the gallant fellows. They continued to 
pursue the enemy and took a village by Storm. hunting 
avalry, infantry, vehicles, and ambulance-cars into it. The 
znd brigade, coming up at a brisk trot, cut them of from 
the road, Night drew on. Reports came in from all sides: 
the Reds were routed all along the front; we had taken more 
than a thousand prisoners, twelve guns and sixty-five machine- 
gas, and an immense amount The position which 
eral Kasanovitch had abandoned had been won back. 
Í returned to the railway station to which General Denikin 
the Allies had already gone. The journey seemed inter- 
! Cossack infantry. 


51 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


minable; our horses were at the end of their tether 
General Denikin and the Allied Mission havin 


g supper sand â 

ve me a great welcome as I came in, for they alread hey 

the result of the day’s work. dey ) 
As soon as my guests’ train had gone, | went to bed h 6 
had no sleep for forty hours, and had ridden more 9 5 
hundred kilometres in the let twenty-four hours. Oy e 
By the end of December the enemy's um was tte, 
destroyed and its remnants scattered over the steppe, uy À 


On December 26th a convention was signed * 
General Denikin and the head of the Don Cossacke' Gove,” 
ment, The Don kept its autonomy, but gave up the supreme 
command of its army to General Denikin, who me 
not only Commander-n-Chief of the Volunteer Army, bun 
also Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of South 
Russia. 

The next day a telegram from General Denikin into 
me that I had been appointed Commander-in-Chief of the 
Volunteer Army, while General Pokrovsky was to take Over 
the command of my cavalry division. 

The Volunteer Army was to continue the Pursuit of rhe 
routed army, stize the town of Sviatoi Krest, the Rede’ 
principal base, and then attack the 1th Red Army in the | 
rear whilst it was Still covering the gtoup of spas in Caucasia - 
after this it was to join our cavalry, which was advancing by 
way of the railway, and finish off the enemy, 


After a few days of desperate fighting, the enemy army was 
touted and we occupied the spas. 


„„ rn rene 


III. Tre LMrAANHoN or Trarx 


As I had no one in mind for my chicf-of-ftaff, the Com- 
mander-in-Chicf suggested my having General Yusefovitch. 
I did not know him personally, but only by reputation—and 
a very good reputation it was | accepted t suggestion, and 
have never regtetted so doing. I could not have had a berrer 
man. 


On January 8th 
arriving the next day at the 
my Headquarters, For the 

d not left my rail 
to do so, in order to 


l heard that the Commander-in-Chief was 
Spas, where I wanted to establish 
last few days I had been fecling ill, 
way-carnage. As 1 was attempting 
go and call on the General, one 


> THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA 9 1 


„y messengers came to tell me that he was coming to 
of 


me. me that the troops operating in the coal-minin 
“He told a and in the Crimea mer to be amalgamat 
srt ed the Volunteer Army; those that I commanded 
ro take the name of the Caucasian Army. I refused to 
tle hallowed by the names of Generals Komilov 


che ti , 
give Wexcie’ and as a concession my army was called the 


- r s 
Vola red upon my duties on January toth, and issued a 
| order to my troops. 
Ein che early 2 of the Revolution a large number of 
mos of them society folk had left the capital cities 
peor ake refuge at the spas. As soon as the Reds got to 
(ossis, the refugees were persecuted in every conceivable 
but when it was known that the Whites were coming, 
n ‘al terror began, and got worse daily. The Bolshevists 
hot hundreds of men, including General Ruzsky, the former 
s-in-Chicf of the Armics on the northern front, 
snd Radko-Dmitriev, the hero of Galicia. Everyone who had 
— death had lost a brother, son, or father, and most 
72 all their worldly possessions too, Great numbers of 
these poor devils were terrified that the Reds would rerum, 
iad fed to the reat of our Army, crowding out the railway 
gations and the trains. 

The spas were still 8 Bolshevists who had not 
been able to escape in time, were now trying to break 

h our lines, thinking that they would be — — than 
on the scene of their crimes, 

Typhus was raging ; there was practically no medical service, 
and a complete Jack of drugs. The epidemic spread terribly. 
For lack of hospitals, the sufferers were packed together in 
private houses, Stations, and railway-carriages. Having no one 
to nurse them, the poor wretches dragged themselves out into 
the treets to look tor food, and died there. We did endung 
in out power to bring a little order into this confusion, orde 
the disinfetting of the stations and vehicles, and turned shops 
ind cinemas into new nupa 

General Pokrovsky, who was to take over the command 


Ot my corps, came and presented himself to me. He knew 
Was prejudiced against him, but showed great tact and 
dignity in his awkward position, and did not attempt to be 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
n ant ro me at all costs, In short, he behaved like 4 
pleas | 
The Commander-in-Chief called a council of wa 


-~$ a * r Con ' 
: hi j for civil affairs, General Dra Nic. 
F Genera! Liakhoy Cute, 


Si 


lc 
ò "E hi 
— of campaign. All the which could be spare d, af à 


' a > entrate 
: alfield which was being occupied h G 
Mai- gen. Onl those which were really feel 1 

f 


way of Kharkov, 
2. Yusefovitch seconded my scheme, but ir was of no 
avail. General Denikin stuck to his point of view. 
1 saw the General several times daily. Together WE went 
for a day’s trip to the Kislovodsky baths, and as We talked 
of this and I got to know him. T have ci Kid 


in Was one of the best generals in the old Russian ; 
2 man of high papi rank, who h 


of the Supreme General Staff at the very be innin 
deren be had made à courageo aene 


: ers 
s- yone knows his brilliant closin Speech at 
the Eress at Moghilev., He was an - 


is tige SPent his childh oaae 
his bee his time sing? et bi hood in the coun 3 
* > à e t ‘ 
his success in his career to Stul sig sed owns; pape 


* pif LISERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASTA 


yi 

t he believed to be infallible powers of judg- 
m pei bs? credit no one s opinion but his own. Yok 
gen tess clear-sighted than men who were otherwise 


I iofs: i j 
P. aferi n of a minor officer of the line, and he 
wis e was 7 to back the humbler classes against — 
gait uf n “the courtiers”, and “officers of the guard”, He 
i di sensitive, and took meticulous care to safeguard 
ue ‘against slights which were sometimes purely 
ys i 


aga’, laid upon his shoulders the burden of a gigantic 
$ how quite. foreign to him, and had . him 
„kin a pool af passions and political intrigue. He felt 
to à v ud at this unsuitable work, was afraid of making 
j&t, be trusted nobody, and yet failed to find sufficient 
rin himself to enable him to navigate the ship of state 
areng firm hand over the Stormy waters. 
he struggle went on. The enemy made vain efforts to stop 


pe Kalinovskaia, the remnants of the enemy’s army which had 
enh destroyed. A few cavalry troops were all that 


am, guns, wagons, dead, and wounded, Our cavalry took 
thirty-one thousand prisoners, eight armoured cars, two hun- 
dred cannon, and three hundred machine-guns. Our advance- 
pas was at Kizlar, our outposts on the shores of the Caspian. 

twelve days our cavalry had covered a distance of three 
bundred and fifty kilometres. 

Once Pokrovsky was in occupation of Kizlar, I went off 
to thank the troops. Halfway there, finding that the railway 
lines had been destroyed, I made the rest of the journey by car. 
Traces of the disorderly retreat of the Red Army were to be 
sen everywhere. The highway was covered with corpses, 
dereli& carts, and dead horses. All the houses and sheds were 
full of wounded, 
ai Mozdok, sixty-five kilometres farther on, there were not 
ben EO, carts, ambulances, and vast numbers of corpses, 

* convoys of prisoners, marching by one after the 


ya MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


other in an uninterrupted stream. Ragged, Starving, with . 
bleeding feet, thousands of these poor creatures dra wate, 
themselves along with an escort of only a few Cosson 
Two Cossacks were enough to guard several thous’: 
prisoners, ill ot wounded as most of them were. There — 
many stragglers. They marched along, Stumbling and fallin 
getting on to their fect again with the greatest difficulty and 
attempting to go on, then sinking down, nevet to get up again 
vent into a signalman’s hut at an abandoned railway Station 
Eight men were lying there, peres close against one another 
I asked one of them where the station-master was, He did not 
answer, 1 questioned one of the others—no reply. I Stooped 
down to them. They were all dead except one who was in the 
lat throes; he was clasping a dying dog to his chest, trying to 
get some warmth from tr. 8 

The Kations and sidings were crammed with abandoned 
trains, the engines burnt out, the carriage doors Stoved in, 
The people of the neighbourhood were looting them. All 
bia. ya up with guns, carpets, and a hundred and one lovely 
things, were the dead and wounded. In one of the trains 
I saw a dying man with bis head pillowed on his comrade’s 
dead body. 

In one station I was shown an ambulance train: there were 
forty-four carriages full of dead bodies, and not one live man 
amongst them. One carriage was devoted to Sisters of Chanty 
and doftors—dead, too, of course. General Pokrovsky had 
sent a score or twa of men to clear the Stations of the dead 
and wounded, They were shovelling them on to the hand- 
carts as though they were coals and throwing them into 
sandpits. From Kargalinskaia Station to Kizlar, a distance of 
twenty · ive kilometres, the line was obstructed by the débris of 
rolling-4tock and piles of merchandise. It must have been 
worth millions. There was no one to guard all this wealth, and 
everyone was taking what he wanted. Some trucks full of 
ammunition had jugt been overturned; the wreck was Kill 
smouldering, and masses of corpses, including those of women 
and children, were lying on the ground. 

The Terek had been freed and was coming to life again. 
In the Streets through which we passed many houses had been 
destroyed, but the streets were crowded. The people laughed 
and sang and cheered us, The Cossacks were galloping about, 
the women in their beautiful peasant dresses were taking theif 


ben for walks. My chauffeur pulled up to ask the way. 

chil “ed of children collected to take a look at us at close 

Ac About a dozen little urchins, the eldest of whom 
ave been more than fourteen or fifteen, were 

deri rifles twice as big as themselves. 

sh Hallo, children, what are you doing with those things?” 

je sng the Reds, was the reply; “they're hiding down 

athe reeds by the tiver. ey 

i 7 billed seven of them to-day,” said a twelve-year-old 


ſtetꝰ· 
å not 


in a big fur cap. * 
Never before during our Civil War had the full horror of 
„ fratricidal struggle struck me so clearly. 
wn of Groznoy, centre of the petrol wells, had been 
on back, 50 had the bigger town of Vladikaykaz, After 
loody encounters, the last remnants of the Reds who 
iad taken refuge in the mountains had been killed off or taken 


dgoners. One of our divisions by itself had taken more 


than ten thousand. 
Northern Caucasia was free. 
General Denikin’s armies now had a base, an extra- 


ordinarily rich piece of territory, a big reserve force, and 
everything that was necessary for the troops. 

I had only just gone back to the spas when I was taken ill. 
| forced myself to get about as usual and do my work, but 
in the end I had to take to my bed, Typhus set in, and complica- 
tions developed, owing to an old wound. I received first-class 
yrention from two famous dottors, both professors from 
Petersburg, who were also refugees in Caucasia, but to no 
vail. The doctots declared that I could not pull through. My 
wife arrived, but I did not recognize her; the doctors told 
her that she must be prepared for the worst; they told General 
Vusefovitch that I could not live through the night. The 
Lat Sacrament was administered to me. Then at seven o'clock 
in the morning came the ctisis, and I turned the corner. 

My convalescence was a slow business. I was not allowed 


to get up until the middle of March. The Commander-in-Chief 
wrote me a very kind letter. I was so weak that it took me 
hours to write him a reply. 

I cannot sufficiently praise the kindness of my friends and 
of perfect strangers. eral Denikin knew that I was in 
financial difficulties, and charged up the expenses of my illness 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
0 


to the Government. The doctots refused to take their fee 


and Strangers sent me wine, fruit, and other things, 5 
Whils I was ill, my army was transferred to the Coaliiey 
area in Donetz, General Ulagay and his cavalry co 


; cn Wer 
the only ones left behind to cover the Sviatoi-Kreg distri 85 


a few regiments under General Chatilov were still at Dagheg 
cheatin the villages of Reds. My Headquarters had ’ 
transferred to Rostov on the Don, where General Y 
fovitch was taking my place during my absence; T Still ha 
special escort and some of my Stafl-othcers with me. 

The dottors forbade me to do any work, so my wife and 
I went to Sotchy, a spa and seaside town on the Black ; 
We took my escort with us, and also one or two Orderly 
officers. A delightful villa had been put at our disposal, and 
the country round about was beautiful. I kept in touch with 
my Headquarters by telegraph. Yusefovitch sent me the 

rt which he had presented to the Commander-in-Chief in 
which he had again stressed the absolute necessity of joining 
up with Admiral Kolrchak’s Army. 

I did not stay in the 2 very long. The news was bad 
The Reds had driven back General Borovsky's troops and 
advanced into the Crimea. Relations between our Commander- 
in-Chief and the Government of Georgia had grown v 
bitter, and a complete ra seemed likely. Hostilities were 
expected to begin on the frontier near rae in a day or two. 
In the neighbouring mountains bands of deserters from the 
Red and White armies, known as “Greens”, were organizing 
themselves at the instigation of the Georgians. 

As the Greens became sive, the commander of the 
little garrison in Sotchy asked me to let my escort reconnoitre 
on the outskirts of the town. I told one of the officers to take 
some men and do as requested. ‘Twelve kilometres from the 


rn the Greens fell upon them, killing a Cossack and two 
rses, 


The commander of the garriso vo 
drive the Greens back. Th Zartison sent out a detachmen 


¢ officer and a number of men were 


Use. 
d my 


Many of my officers had their wives and children with them, 
and my escort was mounted. Tt was impossible to get every- 


n -5 
ye eF ēd a eF a M d r 


A A m, å- 


SS Pe pmd — 


Ca ws 


r . a a a O a o ee a 


P THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUCASIA 


77 
and all, on board a small torpedo- bo 

pdt de thought of leaving anyone behind So I decided te 

ar py train, come what 4 * N machine-guns put on 


and when night allen, we Started off. T 
— some bullets after us, but they had not fete 
Greens nent way, and we arrived safely. 

_ the or way I had the train Stopped on the Kuban frontier 
On ent to thank some towns and villages who had elected 
1d wen nataty Cossack”, 

1 had resumed its normal course everywhere, There had 

L 5 good harvest, and the country was getting rich again. 
ben Cossacks gave me a cordial welcome and talked to me 

111 had been one of themselves, The Cossack proletariat is 
y v more civilized than the Russian peasantry, always havin 
self-government of a kind. Th one all — 
af out government“, meaning the Kuban Government, 
They thou ht that the Rada talked too much and quarrelled 
soo often, ormulating policies, but not really considering the 
rue needs of the country. i 

A litle while before Easter I arrived at Ekaterinodar, 
where the doctors sent me to bed again. But before I obeyed 
them I forced myself to go and see the Commander-in-Chief, 
who also prescribed a complete rest for me until I was quite 


H — took a rosier view of things than ever, in 
p spite of the Red invasion of the Crimea, the complications with 
` Geria, and the bitter and fruitless struggles in the coalfields. 
"| The question of military tions seemed to have been 
ns telegated to a secondary place. Important political matters 
he had come to the fore. 
The help which France and England had promised had 
to materialize, Boats laden with war materials and 
drugs, things of which the Army was in great need, had 
atrived at Novorossiisk. They promised us tanks and aay ee 
Northern Caucasia was unanimous in 28 tal 
as Commander - in- Chief. In his secret conflict with the 
Ataman of the Don, it was Denikin who came off best. 
nov fell, and a new Ataman, Bogaievsky, came into 
er; he was a pusillanimous tam, and Fiend uarters could 
ès they liked with him. In the Terek and the Kuban 
us power was almost absolute, though it is true that his 
tations with the Government of Ekaterinodar, with Ataman 


oms OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


76 well as Rada, were rather strained, since they disagrecꝗ a 
as W D 
most questions. ed the rankest intolerance toward 
Head one Sy ae did not blindly endorse : = 
Cossacks an ikin’s motto, Russia, one and indivisible 
point of view. Denikin he whole, was to be ex," 
: and obscure phrase on the > . every 
a 4 ped tchword. Those who held any other opinion, or — 
S. ed to do so, were stigmatized as separatists. Anyone 
r led a separatist who had fought the Reds unde; the 
Ukrainian flag, or who had taken service with the He 
this included a very large number of officers who were now 
serving in the Volunteer Army. These officers did not give 
a thought for Headquarters? high politics, but were ready to 
fight the Bolshevists whatever theit leadets motto might be 
But Headquarters regarded them almost as traitors, ore 
they were admitted to the service they had to ass 
a purgatory called the “Committee of Rehabilitatio 
unjust, severe, and unintelligent proceeding 
Admiral Koltchak’s Army was comin 
enemy had concentrated their forces on 
tried in vain to Stop it. Operations had 
this front for some time owing to the snow. In the south 
had not very success 8 eo the last four months, 
occup e sou 
In the Donetz coalfield N oi had been obliged to withdraw 


can troops had been 
ey towards the Isthmus of Kertch. The Co 


n, an 


mmander- 
m , taff were not satisfied with General 


need to csapproved of their plan of campaign, The crying 


orces with Koltchak’s Army Simply stared us 
mx attempts to a the subject were 


t the et · in a report in which 
— Situation from MY point of view 2 
5 on, sin . 
N since the enem 


Vs forces were infinitely 
erate simultaneously 

all ecisive action apai a 
A y, this spot could only be Tsaritsin 
f ect a junction with 
al that we would have to give up 
. hortened our front on 


Ss CS 


A W. => 


©- 


— — . a a 


THE LIBERATION OF NORTHERN CAUICASIA 


aht bank of the Don by about one hunds * 
he nien and took the initiative de tated and fifty 
ometres ve in the ditection 1 
lower! l had 


ipd cist ive would fall to the enemy, and they would be 


it would be all that we could manage Otherwise 
che inini 7 : 
pheeatenih berker soon came true. On Aptil 
ro à APT 
My P — that the enemy had 8 — — — 
to the line of the V ladikavkasc-Rogtov railway, Our units 
resented scarcely putting up any resistance. 
On the 3th l was awakened during the night. The chief 
of Headquarters General Staff and the quartermagter-gencral 
there and wanted to see me. Romanovsky told me that 
here was disastrous news from the front. We had got to do 
ing d rate. He asked me to take command of all 
he troops we could possibly muster and send to Manytsch. 
As Yusefovitch was still at Rostov, d tizing for me, 
{ would have to leave him my General Staff, but I could form 
another, It was impossible to do anything with the forces 
hey proposed to give me. and [ could not form an efficient 
General Staf from men scleéted anyhow from all over the 


11 00 him that under such conditions I must refuse the 
command, and I pointed out to him where the troops necessary 
to Kop the Red advance were to be found, But he did not 

with me. He thought that if the troops were moved from 
ane to another we should be risking a panic at Rostov. 
i told him that there was no fear of this, because, in the 
circumstances, I would leave for the town immediately, IL as 
Iwas; my Headquarters was there already, and I would resume 
my command Straight away. 

“Your refusal,” said Romanovsky, “will force the Com- 
mander-in-Chief himself to take the Manytsch command which 
he offered to you.“ 

I replied that this would be all to the good. The Com- 
mander-in-Chief could transfer troops from wherever he 
thought proper, whereas I would have had to make do with 
whatever troops had been given to me. Moreover, citcum- 
ances would compel him to use some of those I had 


Romanovsky, Pluchtchevsky-Pluchtchik (the quarter- 
magter-general), and I were not on very good terms when 
ve parted. The next day, the Commander · in Chief asked me if 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


d my mind. I answered that, with the 


staff was willing to allow me, it w } 
his plan, and I asked his mee inpo 
on 

t 


7 
1 had not change 
that his chief-ot- 


sible to carry out 
return to my Headquarters and resume my command. I 
evening I left for Rostov. l Tha 


CHAPTER y 
THE MARCH ON Moscow 


L Harp AT THE Don 


jx the spring of 1919 the position of General Denikin’s 
“ „jes was as follows;— 
The French, who had been occupying Odessa after the fall 
Hetman, had evacuated the town without any warni 
tthe end of March, and the pretence of a Russian Army which 
was just being formed there had dwindled away to nothing, 

The Crimea was abandoned, all but the isthmus of Kertch, 
where General Schilling had concentrated some troops, which 
the Allied fleet were supporting with their artillery, 

In the Donetz area the Volunteer Corps, under General 
Mai-Maievsky, was still holding out against the enemy, who 
were doing their utmost to make themselves masters of the coal- 
fields. There was some very heavy fighting, and our forces 
were — daily. On the left k, near Marioupol, 
a smail group of our troops were face to face with the Reds. 
We intended to concentrate a cavalry corps, commanded 
by General Chkouro, on Mai-Maievsky’s right flank. This 
corps was in co-operaton with the Army of the Don. 
The first division of my Kuban Cossacks in Pokrovsky’s 
Company had received marching-orders for the Manytsch 
front; simultaneously a division of Terek Cossacks trans- 
ferred from the Caucasian forces was supposed to take its 
place. Until these troops arrived, the whole Rostov region, 
an extremely important area, was left uncovered. There was 
Panic in the great town of Rostov, one of Russia's chief 
centres of commerce. There was a large Bolshevist element 
there, which raised its head when it realized that the town 

been left empty of troops. 

I tried to hasten the arrival of the Cossacks, who were 
iready on the march, and sent an armoured car to cover the 
of Bataisk, which was some vetsts from the town on 

urther bank of the Don. The police gave notice of dis- 

in the working-class part of the town, and of the 
7 


L WRANGEL 
MEMOIRS OF GENERA 

re Ishevist emissaries. Í ae 7 ——— ie thor 
arrival of Bo be Red agents. The civil a tration — 
we proved to s dangerous to do this until 3 troops atriy ed 
tested that it wa id only add to our 1 Aor eres, i 
and that it cou of action to be for the best, and that 
uche Thad seventy people thrown into prison, and six of them 
night fi urt-martial; one of them was an influenti 
sent up for co himself hopelessly a lon 


romised A time 

5 * to- do amongst the el — 

Ail ix w. condemned to death and shot within dwenty. four 

1 Then things quietened down again and remained quiet 
2 Denikin, who in effect had taken over the co 


on the Manytsch front, was soon convinced that ad hb 


„A nc had 
I had suggested, as I had prophesied to his 
Giebel. In Manytsch one bitter Struggle Succeeded 


and we could do nothing without it. The situation Was also 
— h wòrse in the Donetz area, but we held out there in 


On April zoth I went to report on our position in the 
Donetz to the Commander-in-Chief, for it had me Critical, 
I asked him how things were going on the Manytsch front. 
He told me that in spite of the numerous reinforcements, which 


I asked him who was at the head of this mass of cavalry, 
ed to learn that there Was no unity of com- 
mand. I observed that under Nditions i 


co · Ordinate the 
wit bonis D ciel, said the 8 
equal.“ © dle authority of any other, for they are all 


THE MARCH ON Moscow 


much Struck by the Commander-i i “ 
l Denikin, who appeared to be so — 
cen, showed an inexplicable lack of resolation sb 
auen with his colleagues. He himself was a teal soldier for 
ges hard on himself, but it seemed that he dated — 
be as much Neen his subordinates, In this instance he 
und brin to put one genera 
oild der. General Romanovsty a sears the orden 
of an and said to me: “Help us, and the caval 
all the generals would obey you cheerf y. 
was certain that only co-ordinated action by the cavalry 
sld end this unlucky campaign which had lasted too long 
i, and 1 liked the idea of controlling great masses of 
ain and making them play a leading part, So, although 
j was still ill, J consented to take over the command, I sent 
* al officers and my horses, and went to the Manytsch 


will achieve 


I ook Sock of the situation from a church tower, The 
enemy forces were massed in a large village—Veliko- 
tniageskaia—and on its outskirts, on the northern bank of 
the river. The thoroughfares on the south and west of the 
village were defended by trenches. The enemy’s artillery was 
powerful—it was impossible to force a passage. To the eat, 
the Reds had only a very small observation corps, but the river 
was so shallow there that it was more like a swamp than 
a watercourse, and so muddy that the artillery could never 
be got across the ford without Sticking fast. And without 
miley we could achieve nothing, as we knew from experience. 
I decided to improvise a causeway, using the numerous 
wooden fences to be found in the neighbouring villages. 
They had to be fastened together to form a floor, which could 
be put down over the mud to act as a magic carpet for the 
ailry It had to be held under the water very firmly, other- 
chef are hed the omg 1 it needed to be 
weights. I or an expetiment to 
— on a dirty little lake in our rear, The experiment was 
l. and I had a large number of these platforms 
* kilometres to the cast of the village, I found a 

We o Pot for the crossing, and gave the necessary orders. 
e fixed the attack for May 4th. I reached the spot at 
The regiments arrived one after the other. They were 

G 


š MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEI. 

g 

working the whole night long, andat dawn the crossing bep 

The bare, flat Stepps, co. ered with briny pools, en. 
which had alrcady crossed Mied 


«ss, T nts, . 
endless, The regime le file, looked lik the 


Manytsch and were marching 1 Sg 
awling across a desert. By midday , * 
> 


rigantic snake ct : 
RE all the artillery had crossed the river an 
* 


cavalry corps and 2 
in the difance our advance guard was driving the ene. 
back row ards the west. General Chatilov took seven, 
trenches and more than onc thousand five hundred Prisone;, 


that day. . — | 

Our bivouac was not pleasant. It was a very cold nip, 
and wé had not a Suck of 4 bundle ol RSW with which te 
light a Gre, nor had we A drop of drinkable water for the Men 


or horses. Nobody slept that night. 


The battle began again at dawn. The enemy 2 up a 
é tesidanct, but in vain. General Poktovsky force 4 


desperat | 
them fo fall back on their base, His men were occupying the 
farms where once the great studs which had furnished out 
cavalry with remounts had been kept. They had been very 
prosperous farms, but now they were nothing but a hap oF 
houses were rooficss and windowless, the gar ens 


ruins. The 1 
trampled down, the sheds doorless and full of rusty, broken 


agricultural implements. An enormous number of dead oxen 
and horses littered the pastures and polluted the air. 

The attack on the whole front was to begin at five o'clock, 
An unusually high haystack the size of a two-Storey house 
served me as an observation-post. I could see the artillery 
firing on two sides, and the cavalry divisions taking up their 
position, Our aircraft was circling over Velikokmageskaia 
On the left fank, our first division set off at a ga OP amid 
thundering cheers and disappeared behind a hill, General 


Pokrovsky’s corps was getting into battle-order. 
Suddenly I heard guns in our rear, One of General Zykov’s 


orderlies came to tell me that great masses of enemy cavalry 
had turned our right flank. With the help of my field-glasses 
I could see the Astrakhan Cossacks of Zykov's division 
marching to their help; shells were bursting all around them. 
Suddenly the Cossack ranks broke and turned tail, I leapt 
into my car, hurried to Pokrovsky’s corps, and sent a division 
to mect the Reds, who were driven back. Once more the troops 


bivouacked on the spot. 
The enemy's reintorcements had come up, and could have 


THE MARCH ON Moscow 
aa very awkward Position at an " 
gut us way of retreat open behind us, aad onl There Was 
dalle on the right bank of the Manyrsch, and The 

erves. 
fresh Oa 6th we resumed the offensive. For t 
had scarcely slept and had eaten 
wa, had had nothing to drink; both me 
bo used 
aba we bad to finish the job, cog What it mi 
But we d I saw that, in ite of their w might, I Spoke to 
the eT ocak, Pa P . ir weariness, they were 
artillery opened the attack, and | hatangued 
irh colours unfurled, and drew up the meh n — 
** sounds of music, as though it had been a 7 


P, and the mass 
ag We of dust, 
é > 

gered and began a hurried retreat l tits 


ousand prisoners, 
afty-five guns one hundred and fifty machine- 8. 

Now there was nothing to prevent us from marching on 
Tsaritsin and then on to the Volga. 

The enemy were in flight northwards, blow up the 
badges and destroying the railroads as they went. i ordered 
Chatilov’s company to pursue them. 

The next day I entered Velikokniageskaia, where Chatilov 
had already eStablished his Headquarters. Some Circassians 
who had been caught in the very act of marauding were brought 
in. I had them court-martialled, and two hours later five of 
them were hanged. 


Í ordered their bodies to be left on the gallows for a few 


days, to prove to the tr and the civil population that no 
excesses would be tolerated. 
1 after, General Denikin arrived, He was over- 


embraced me. He had been present at the cavalry 
unck and said that he had never, during the whole Civil War, 
wen artillery fire as brisk as the enem s had been when they 
tad fred on our charging 


our 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
ting on the Manytsch, to wit, Pokroys 
Aa troops Cutie and Savelicv s company of ky’s 
cavalry Circassian and t s aps Werbe divisio 
in ivisi d ay’s c op, whi 
the 6th infantry division, a | Tews 2 wh 


the 
j ar in. troops in the coalfield area of Do 


Seng saber RY sievsky, received the title of the Volunteer 
Army. My Army was ordered to march on Tsaritsin and ty 
ke it. 
Well Denikin said to me, “when are you going to win 
Tsaritsin for us? . 
I told him that if everything went according to plan, we 
own in three weeks. The reg 


would be at the gates of the t 
ded not on me, but on him, It was im sible to take 
the town without artillery and infantry. ral = 
promised to send me a Cossack infantry brigade and the 
necessary artillery, As his train moved out, he smilingly held 
up three fingers to mean allusion to the three weeks in 


which Tsaritsin was to be taken. 


Headquarters had not sent 
4. me any new on i 
journey on horseback, riding with the fount troop — 


us—hundreds 
of carts drawn by camels, which scarcely 


to move, so slow was their 
SUOMECTLES to co 
their deans ver, weeks to travel, before they reached 


The g 299 x 
tilling sun beat down on the poor wretches lying there 


THE MARCH ON MOSCOW 
t 


which were devoid of hood . 
ja gere oiled, and made an anch at ee axles 
* for days there was not a drop of water to re F the 


* ber one night which we spent in the 
nfa bl oody battle, It was a beautiful nigh 7 on the 
eve Iich Stars, the steppe with tents Ja i 2 
wett an saddle for a pillow, and I could ber my soldier 
: talkin uld hear my soldiers 
naghing and g, the horses snorting with fear i 
= and the firing in the distance, I fel `- Pe Ar e 
cit that I was back in the 
snes when the technique of modezn warfare was still * 5 — 
nen telegraphs, telephones, motor- cars, lorries, and rail 
ways did not exist, when the commander marched wi ht is 
troops, slept on the ground as they did, and someti e 
grater to uench his thirst, even as they. * 
We had kept our promise, but Headquarters had not k 
theirs. The promise artillery, infantry, cars, and — hed 
not arrived, and they had done nothing to help u 5 
Velikokniageskaia-Tsaritsin railway in good r l 
gas our only line of communication, I had sent dispatch aft : 
in vain—nothing happened, Headquarters seemed 0 
have forgotten us. All its attention was concentrated he 
ed in Buat on the 
On May 22nd, after General Pokr r 
| telegraphed to the „ kra; KREPA 
criminal not to follow up our success. What we d 
cheaply now will cost us huge losses in the future Cong : 
is not enough. The cavalry can do wonders, b f : 
remove barbed wire. If you do not heb me infant * 
Sainas; dad moce —— ——— 
. 
bt a Phi vidtory.” — EM 
Ke — thing, N May 24th, in which I more or less repeated 
, Ladded: “I realize the necessity of continui 
rations on the other fronts, but I insi if the 
n wh. t I must insist that if the 
il colin to nnd . or is delayed, all your other operations 
sod 1 ha ching. ou promised me artillery and infantry, 
1500 my whole campaign on your promise. Whilst 
— . N 
my duty ahi nsist on having what is indispensable. I feel it 
Taking you the truth quite crudely like this.” 
Was surrounded by many lines of trenches and 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL à 
sé - . | 
four of tive lines cig wire. A strong artillery i 
defended the approaches: Id 
ummoned 4 N ar. Ty 
On May 29th I <r it that it was unlikely thar the ar the 


$ who com ` ; 
jensi ery we ere expecting would arrive yet ai 


heir advice: should we risk an attack, of. Ue, 
rail ayes S and await the arrival of reinforcement? 
It was unlikely that an immediate attack would succeed, i 
on the other hand the enemy were receiving reinforcemens, 
daily, and making their position more and more secure. 
that even it we waited we would have very little more chs, 0 
of success. Our troops were exhausted by the immense 
difficulties of their march across the desert, and had been 
visualizing Tsaritsin as the Promised Land. If we kept 
waiting too long now, they would be bitterly disappoi 
Moreover, it was quite possible that the enemy would take 
the offensive. If we were driven back on to the Steppe, where 
there were no means of getting fresh provisions, our plight 
would indeed be terrible. The Council Was unanimous] zr 
ake that we must attack. 7 
une ict our attacking force got throu enemy’ 
lines and took several villa e ; 
b auß I — that all our — to take the male oe 
ruitless. enemy's atti N 
casualtics were enormous. We had Tk. li = 
generals, three brigadier-penerals, and elev 3 
ammunition had run out. We had n Captains, Our 
e to abandon — Offensive 


and 1 — . old position. 
Jn June 4th the enem 
their artilery and fresh ite mag. T aeae Ported by al 


to within twenty kilometres of the further bank of is River 


uf b an officer who knew its cont 7 
iti Ve General Yusefovitch, Fee 18 the urgent 
e ya this letter by telegram. Moreover — the 
je i latter let me know that they had issued ‘on onde 4th 
Hoes an infantry division, five batteries three a — 
e gd six tanks, and in addition the railw 1 


at repair. I ordered the bearer of the lener to bung it 
i 


pack t0 un he Army of the D 
Wenn te dad beter, There a hc ayer er 
Ekaterinodar. Headquarters were obsessed wit el Rostov 
d e Moscow at the earliest possible moment, ant ftr 
35 success did not depend solely upon a rapid advance; 
¢ WAS, Lg? — 8 to cover our flanks and keep 
17 Mai-Maievsky, who had recently been appointed 
d of the Volunteer Army, was a ood officer — 
rhis job; he got on well with his subordinates and men. 
had not worn uniform, you would have taken hi 
pen from a little ee theatre, He — lepaka 
wsabarrel, and had a chubby face and a bulbous nose. He knew 
howto make a xo 5 and a had not robbed him 
of his bany: ae A z is uct at his headquarters in 
Rogov roused the in ane on of every honest man. His orgies 
brought 33 e Seay and on authority in i 
The rear of the i y wasalways badly organized. The generals 
bad almost absolute power and thought themselves satraps. 
The troops followed their example and considered every- 
thing permissible. Violence and abuse reigned supreme. As I 
have already said, at the beginning of the Civil War the 
Cossacks had been anxious to win back their possessions, and 
yet I had managed to inculcate ideas of lawfulness into my 
troops. When General Pokrovsky’s men had been incorporated 
in my Army, even they had been forced to give up marauding, 
If little firmness had achieved this result with the Cossacks, 
much easier it should have been with the regular Army! 
As the fresh troops could not possibly arrive until June 11th, 
Went back to my Headquarters, which were established at 


foe wee joined me there. The question of raising an Army 


T 


88 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


the autonomous Kubanian Government. Naoumenko to 

that General Denikin and his Staff were very annoyeg me 
me. They considered that the tone of my dispatches wa 
inadmissible. “General Wrangel,” they said, “does no 

for things, he demands them; Że scems to give ys order» 
Furthermore, they knew that I had not altogether shared the; 
point of view in their misunderstanding with the Rada of 
the Kuban. = 

On june 13th the Volunteer Army took Kharkoy. Th 
Army of the Don continued its northward march. j 

The Tsaritsin-Tikhoretskaia railway had been repaired, and 
the long-expected reinforcements artived during the night of 
the 16th, I resumed the initiative. The tanks and the armour 
cars went first, then the infantry. Once they had destroyed the 
barbed wire, the cavalry charged. The enemy were driven back 
on to their last line of trenches. 

In the morning we returned to the charge and swept u 
to the last line of trenches. By the evening our troops were in 
the town. 

The enemy fled towards the north. During these four days 
of fighting we took two armoured cars, one hundred and 
thirty-one locomotives, ten thousand lorries, two thousand 
and eighty-five of them loaded with munitions, seventy guns, 
three hundred machine-guns, forty thousand prisonets, and 
innumerable cars and carts—an immense amount of spoil. 

On the 19th I entered Tsaritsin and went to the Cathedral, 
where the Te Deum was sung. The archbishop who officiated 
had been forced to flee the town to escape death, and for 
weeks had laid in hiding in the suburbs; he had only jus 
come back. The rest of the priests who took part in the 
service had just been released from prison by our soldiers. 
During the service the bishop and most of his subordinates wept. 

That evening the Commander-in-Chief’s train drew into the 
Station. He thanked us and looked at me with a smile. “Has 
your mood rahade It was not too good.” 

“Yes, Your Excellency, I have been through some very 


terrible moments.” 

In the report which I presented to the Commander-in-Chief 
I Stressed once again the danger of increasing the length of 
the front without having the necessary reserves and a well- 


organized rear. I 2 that we should entrench ourselves 
on the Tsaritsin- 


terinoslav front for the time being, 50 


* THE MARCH ON MOSCOW 8s 


Volga and the Dnieper would be covering our 
st the i KF detach the troops necessary for — 
chet Y peast in the direction of Astrakhan, and at the same 
rhe pr centrate three or four cavalry troops at our centre 
time J about Kharkov. 
2 on the time was Tipe these troops could be used nearer 
\ is . At the same time the rear had to be organized, the 
Mos A cadres enlarged, the reserve forces increased, and 
te pases established. 
eral Denikin read my report and then said with a sly 
ef see! You want to be the first man to set foot in 


* 
Monet day, the zoth, General Denikin attended Divine 


ice and 
ee Yusefovitch and myself into his carriage and read 
ys his o 


<jdorin, was to 80 to Moscow via Votonege-Riazan; while 
\fsi-Maiewsky's Army was to advance on Moscow direct from 
i y via Kursk, Orel, and Tula. 

is order, later known as the advance on Moscow, was 
nothing more not less than a death-sentence for the Armies of 
Southern Russia. All the principles of Strategy were ignored; 
there was no choice of a principal direction, no concentration 
of the bulk of the troops in this direction, and no manccuvring. 
It merely prescribed a different route to Moscow for each of 
the Armies. 

General Yusefovitch and I were simply bewildered, but 
General Denikin himself seemed to be delighted with his plan. 
When we had read it he added merrily: 

“Yes, we are going to advance on big lines now. I shall 
have to use a large-scale map for this campaign!” 

As General Yusefovitch had been appointed to the com- 
mand of an corps, I asked the der-in-Chief 
to give me Chatilov, whom I had known for a long time, 
for my new chief of Staff. 


H. Ox tHe VOLGA 


My Army had sustained heavy losses; the long - expected 
element ki had not — cit the Kuban. General 
had ordered an infantry division and the division of 


e o 


90 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Terek Cossacks to rejoin the Volunteer Army; the troo 
remained with me were exhausted after their three he S that 
kilometre march across the desert and their fo at 
incessant fighting. I asked the Commandet-in-Chief to YS of 
a few days’ delay, to give the troops time to recover, Stant 

“Certainly, take fifteen days,” was the reply, 

I gave the necessary orders, but two days later I rece; 
orders to continue the pursuit of the enemy immediate)® 
At once I sent off the 1st corps of Kuban Cossacks, who . 
less tired than the others, in the direction of Saratoy; but th, + 
were checked at Kamychin. After the defeat of the Reds J 
Tsatitsin, the remnants of their roth Army had fallen back on 
this town, where numerous reinforcements from Moscow had 
joined them. Also several divisions of the Siberian Arm 
which was opposing Koltchak had been ordered there 
The Red artillery was strong, and was reinforced by the 
whole Volga fleet. 

As the ict company could not take the position alone 
I sent the 4th cavalry corps to join it, whilst I myself went to 
Ekaterinodar to see about the reinforcements I should have 
received from the Kuban. 

The Commander-in-Chief received me in the presence of 
General Romanovysky, I told him about the condition of my 
troops: my Cossack regiments only numbered five to six 
. men, and the reinforcements had not arrived. The 
General Staff was too large for this small contingent. If the 
effectives could not be increased, it would be best to discharge 
some of them, and make my army into a regiment. 

The General told me that he could do nothing, and that 
the Kuban Separatists were shirking theit duty in not sending 
me fresh troops“. General Romanovsky advised me to come 
to a direct oo with the Cossack leaders. I replied 
somewhat dryly that this was not within my province. I com- 
manded an Army, and to negotiate with the Kuban Govern- 
ment was outside my sphere. The Commander-in-Chief ordered 
Romanovsky to call a meeting of the Cossack leaders and to 
confer with them in my presence. 

The next day General Romanovsky, the Quartermaster- 
General, the Ataman Filimonov, his colleague, Naoumenko, 
and I, met to discuss the question of the Cossack reinforcements 
from the Kuban. The Ataman Filimonov began by saying that 
the Cossacks were annoyed because their request for # 


4 


SEBASTOPOL 
General Wrangel addressing the troops, March 24, t920 


— —ů 


b tt assay panog ,. ln duenne adus AAN 
nji JO eee Hy MUNA ‘UOOA Y A VY FW *sIucA] M ungn es yO uriely e 50 
- ‘ {ys om ale paua ‘us ( Ip jo “y IYUOAOP A [Ese 
dun Jpayvas *sqdla OF {fe} tiad] 


PUDELLU AIAI O LOT 
rene siya | sary eee eee ere [He Ie) 
‘ {732 I l iy * UNEI ] \ W "ar? NV jc SUPU UEY Ji urid j0 piy ) AONE j * d jea 


— 


THE MARCH ON Moscow, 


9 
: ikin’ i ` granted, and 

goban Denikin’s promises on the subje& r 
Geo oat If their at poe was 1 the 3 been 
the reinforcements wou! d 


are jan Army; he is not a Cossack b 

of the N throughout the country, If he j 

bot aeg pr army, the Kuban Goris Tp era 

all be satisfied.” bot as 
decided to have done with this eternal question once and 

fog all, for it was getting more and more bittet, so I turned 

wards Naoumenko an said: 

“As Commander-in-Chief of the Caucasian Army, I am not 
responsible for the Kubanian politics; were I at the head of 
dais autonomous Army, I should be. But the Rada’s policy is 

that there would be only one course for me to take 
order my Army to dissolve it.” 

silence fell, and General Romanovsky hastened to close the 
meeting. It broke up without having come to any decision. 

Four days later I went back to Tsaritsin. When we had 
uken this town it had been in a terrible state. Most of the 
townsfolk had been massacred by the Reds, and the houses and 
shops had been looted. There were several epidemics raging, 
and the mortality was shockingly heavy. It ma here ben 
from lack of labour, or perhaps it was sheer carelessness, but 
| beard from the residents that twelve thousand corpses had 
deen thrown into a gulley. By the spring all these putrefying 
bodies had poisoned the town. It took quite a week to 
them all, The streets were full of the bodies of dead horses; 
more than four hundred were cleared away. 

And yet gradually this town of the dead came to life once 
more. People who had been hidden Heaven knows where came 
out from their retreats ; the peasants brought their produce to 
the market, and the shops opened. The price of provisions 
fal. Thad taken a hand in bringing about this result. 
8 y after we had taken Tsaritsin I had examined 
the es tions on the north of the town and had constructed 
necessary fortifications there. 


5 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGE 


had sent all the troops I could spare to join th 
4 already ee Kamychin, and on July rath We res, ho 
the offensive, After our days of desperate fighting » 
was taken. We took thirteen thousand prisoners, fo nyap 
guns, twelve locomotives, one thousand lorties, and à ha Ee 
stock of munitions. | te 
General Denikin detached the new contingents from 
Army to reinforce the Volunteer Army. Headquarters infor I 
me that the 1st company of Don Cossacks and the ad 
division were to be taken from me to reinforce the main bat 
of troops. The 7th infantry division and the brigade A 
“plastounes” which had been promised me w 


ere not to tive 
until later on, but nevertheless I was to Continue the ady 


an 
on Saratov immediately, de 
L explained to Head uatters that they were asking the 
impossible. What had I left without the 


anted 


Alt atter 
sses at Tsaritsin and 


to take from me, as the infantry would n 
the departure of the other 9 lo 


But nothing came of my protest, Head 
withdraw the order, and th 


but obey it. And so I eyes fully tealizing that, however 
courageous my troops might be, 
in failure, 

The ttoops advanced on Saratov 


mote; the shops, restaurants, cinemas were opok 
ere 
2 


5 cry. I was determined to be 
ruthless in su Pressing them. I learned that a group of officers 
had been guilt, 15 N excesses in a restaurant, and I had 
Martialled. i 


d his sentence post up in all the public 
thoroughfares, Immediately all ceased 
We continued to puteu paag ; 


THE MARCH ON MOSCOW 
csont, in spite of the extreme 
at the end of their tether, ] 
ho quarters with telegrams urgent 


, 55 
hauttion of the troops 
* 


never Ceased to bom 
bar 
peat 1 7 demanding —— 
‘+ te 36th the enemy began an * 

On huber of men an . of den me. They loĝ a 
jarge m th company to srullery, but the 
freed out 4 ath 12 2 tO fetreat. The next day thi 

pasty resume t e ofensive and routed the Reds — 
conf ing heavy losses. In — report L wrote that a few —— 
$ h apparent successes WOU d compel us to fall back —.— 
ure for lack of combatants. General Pokrovsky’s fo — 
tad come to grips with a detachment of the enemy's ri 
which tly outnumbered ours. After three days of blood f 
fghtin Boudennyi's Red cavalry was beaten. But here * 
z ae heavy losses, especially in generals and superior 

Our peril became more and more obvious. 

* enemy was continually threatening Admiral Koltchak’s 

Ihe Reds foresaw their danger if we should occup 
Saratov, 80 they concentrated many divisions there, king 
them from the Siberian front. The consequences of Gener: 
Denikin’s grategical errors were now becoming obvious. 
He had rejected the pian that I had proposed from the very 
frst, after the liberation of Caucasia, and had thrown our 
troops into the Donetz coalfield area. Suddenly circumstances 
had forced him to transfer a large number of troops to 
Tsaritsin, but he was already too late, for Koltchak’s Army 
was in flight by then, and the enemy’s entire force was massed 


against us. 
ei only we had had enone troops to enable us to reach 
Saratov, as we had been ordered to do, we might still have 
done so before the enemy had had a chance to unite all their 
forces, But, alas! even this was impossible, for we lacked 
the necessary troops. The only thing that we could do now 
was to await the promised reinforcements, and when they 
came resume the offensive. But it was doubtful whether the 
enemy would give us time for this. I summoned a Council of 
War. We decided to avoid a definite engagement, should the 
enemy attack us, and to retreat slowly and piecemeal from 
every position we held in order to gain time. I gave orders to 
— with the fortification of Tsaritsin, where I wanted the 
ve battle with the Reds to take place. . 
On August rst the enemy attacked us all along the line 


= 


94 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


as well as the Army of the Don, which was coverin 
flank. We retreated slowly, fighting all the time. As our ; 
could not get back to Tsaritsin immediately, I decideg HOOPS 
to Ekaterinodar and see that the Kuban Government j 
Ari for its Cossacks. ent 

got to Ekaterinodar and explained the situation to 
Ataman. I told him that if the Cossack reinforcements and th 
supplies did not reach me, I could not possibly hold Tsarit the 
and if it fell the Kuban would certainly be invaded aan” 
I repeated the same thing to the Government. The * mas 
begged me to explain the situation to the Rada. J consented. 
The President was to send me word of the time at which 
the Rada would like to receive me. I warned the Ataman 
that I had to leave for Headquarters at 1 o'clock p.m, the 
next day, 

I waited in vain until twelve midday, when at last Naou- 
menko arrived with an officer from the President of the Rada 
This officer told me that the President had heard by the mereg 
accident that I desired to visit the Rada, and regretted that 
he could not give me an official invitation without know 
if I really wanted one. I replied that as Commander-in-Chief 
of the Caucasian Army and guardian of the interests of the 
Kuban regiments, I was ready to do the Rada the honour of 
explaining the needs of the Kuban Cossacks to it in person, and 
that the Ataman and the Government knew this as well as 
I did. I found it was absolutely useless to deal personally 
with M. Makarenko (President of the Rada and leader of the 
Opposition). I added that I was leaving in an hour's time, 
i that the Cossacks would hear from me how much the 
President of the Rada cared for their welfare. 

The oficer returned very shortly and said that the Rada 
was expecting me. Several members of the Rada accompanied 
him and invited me to go back with them. I told them that 
I could not postpone my departure, and half an hour later 
I left for Tsaritsin. 

Things were satisfactory on our fronts and on the Astrakhan 
General Erdeli’s troops were advancing, whilst his 


front. 

reconnoitring parties were kilometres from the town. 
The Volunteer Army was approaching Kursk, Odessa, 
and Kiev. The Don Cossack N under General Mamontev, 


was operating in great masses in the enemy's rear, and was 
already nearly at Tambov. destroving the railroads. blowing 


ynition depots as rog 
up 7 the Reds ha — Went, and Sending h * 
f They had been proceeding with h 8 home the 
Laalitsin fort. This Stronghold Was the fottifications 
‘a base and as a psychological fabio “FY useful to r yr the 
„ficient; it needed a garrison fresh — But it alone y, pei 
ough to be effective. Ugh to fight, ander 
My Army continued to retreat slow] Bi 
gith the enemy daily, The effective | and came to bl 
regiments was now reduced to one he force of the i 
; und cavalry 
nd fifty. One of the regiments of the 6 red or o 
entirely wiped out. Theb we 
he size of à battalion. Certain batteries had s» 
only one or two guns. ? horses enough for 
Realizing the Army’s plight, I ordered th 
town to begin. Seven trains were to ler © evacuation of the 
thing to be hurried off was the war ve every day. The firs 
and military administrations were i, aerial; then the civil 
civilians who wanted to leave the tow Soi and lastly those 
their names at the town hall to this effet. Te had entered 
room for each person to take one trunk Ar was luggage 
enormous number of people entered thei Arri De 
that in defiance of the regulatio 755 d and heard 
crammed with merchandise, furni ce anda eee 
The General whose du rit e 
F 
devil, I do not know whether it was ill-will on fe pan at aha 
administration, or simply — bet 3 
ay urak the seven trains got away, and on the second es 
singled out several Cossacks fr 
bo the te rom my escort and went 
a ar af passenger train was just leaving. The carriages 
il hives p ae mirrors, and valuable furniture. I had it 
bate smashed. Then I discovered a train with 
with n 7 5 documents said that they were loaded 
— pee g had them opened. They were not full of 
ett away EA 2 of passengers, mostly ews, who wanted to 
me tha’ th e their merchandise with them. They informed 
colleagues 7 e bribed the station- master and two of his 
r d these three employees court-martialled, and 
mecution ged the same chy. The news of their arrest and 
Was communicated to all the railway stations, 


- 


5 OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


MEMOIR ä 

an proceeded satisfactorily, E, 
1 er that the maser A seven, and when fe Nen 
trains left daily ae was completely evacuated, 5 


approached, e ‘he long expected reinforcements attive 
e. a brigade of 7 antry. It occup ied parts of Isaritzin, 
i.e. a brig forced by a cavalry division, the last of the Fresk 
and was re disposal. I had had to withdraw 


loa, thus leavi 
the left bank of the Volga, ing m 
alt fank uncovered, The majority of my troops, afte, 
teny days’ marching and fi hting, were retreating towards 


Tsaritsin with the enemy at t 
ment had given orders that t 


all costs. l 
our regiment at Saratov, made up for 


At the first encounter, 
the most part of Red deserters, went over to the enemy, who 


were occupying our first line of trenches. The 4th division of 
Kuban Cossacks who were in reserve learned accidentally 
that things were going badly, and without waiting for orders 
they saddled their horses, galloped to the scene of battle 
threw themselves upon the enemy, and routed them. This 
charge cost the Reds dear, Our soldiers performed prodigies 
of valour; no one would have imagined that these men had 
just accomplished a two hundred and fifty kilometres’ march 
during which they had lacked all the necessaries, and were 
a dropping pon yi 
e position that the Saratov regimen 
18 by . ae on eee eee the battle 
e town an 
I was informed that a ines or Red £ — n 
their fleet’s artillery, was attacking o Fl sea tier en 
sition whero the defences wers 8. 55 of the sections of our 
incomplete. The marines 


eir heels. The Soviet Govern. 
he town was to be taken at 


once more, and m escort 
my disposal) to jee teens had no other forces at 


The Streets were 
lorries, The tow ze 1255 Wounded, ambulance-cars, and 


Outside Staff H quitted th z 
graph apparatus on to re mabe My —— 


d THE MARCH ON MOSCOW “i 
s for us. The train which was to take the G i 
ener 


gh — yeas in the station. 
Aa SO train on to the next Station and ordered th 
e cars 


5 che N 

1 bridge and wait for us on th 

e Oe oy and I, followed by sever e fa side. Then 

r Cathe northern part of the town IE there con 
1 wanted to be with the troops. Was to 


pe? By] quite near us and set fire to one of RN 
t= other fell * a er: * 3 ay 
wa furnace, Sora of my escort had pre- 
ir us and were already fighting. 

Fe emerged from the town; night had fallen and everything 


— quiet. i s | | 
- as thou h we are Kill holding out,” ae 
ag hy yoe ry have encountered Body SEER 

Wes, our counter-attack PTA to have succeeded.” 

he time we got tO a village it was almost dark, 

By oe lighted up, and saddled hars were waiting — 
K uns bur I8 corps General Staff; they had just received 
deus (1000 our tight flank. Everything was proceeding 
ccording to plan; the Kuban 4th division had attacked 2 

nme, as I had ordered them to. The Cossacks, still 


annihilated a regiment of marines. My escort had driven 
rhe out of the suburbs. The iers too had done 
work and the Reds. 


When we Wick to the town there was not a soul to be 
Dispat from the other generals were waiting for us. 


ei 
hundred and sixty machine-guns. 

nd two further screens to take 
Tuacitsin. After six weeks of Nur warfare the enemy 's 
Armies were beaten and their spirit broken. The Caucasian 
Army, rested and reinforced, had become pl ul again 
8 Tsaritsin was not threatened again for 4 

X Men Oaober ath our Army resumed the offensive 
advanced fifty kilometres to the north of the town. 

emoralized to be a danger to us dn 


—— 


9 bers were t 
for the moment, but our number ~ do Smal 
varies be able to dream of marching on pA especially 
as General Erdeli’s troops were retreating in the Astrakhan 
on me A uattets for fresh orders count . 
manding the route prescri by the advance on Moscow. 
In reply, General Romanovsky insisted on my resumi & the 
offensive. I tried to answer him, but he appeared to take ve 
little notice of my arguments. Obviously Supreme Head. 
uattets had no grasp of the real situation. I obtained leave 
m the Commander: in- Chief to go to Taganrog t and mak. 
my report to him in person. i 
1 — at 2 — Headquarters if the advance on 
Moscow was still part of their plan. I found that it was, ang 
though I did my best to prove to them that it was out of the 
question, General Romanovsky insisted on it. I was heartily 
sick of the war, and said that since I could not do the impos. 
— I must request him to replace me with someone more 
capable, 
Jou know as well as I do,” he replied, “that you ate the 
only man who can do it.” 
eneral Denikin’s Army continued its rapid march towards 
Moscow. It took Kiev, Kursk, and Orel, cavalry was at 
the gates of Voronege, All Southern Russia, with its Wealth of 
Provisions of all kinds, was in General Denikin’s power, and 
we heard of new successes daily, But it had been clear to 
for a lon time, and I had not hidden my opi ion from the 
Commander-in-Chief that we were building 2 sand: ber 
bitten off fat mote than we could chew Our front was t ol 
in comparison with the number of our forc 3 
* bases aoa no strongholds in our — * 
e enemy, on the c StriGtly „ +s 
of strategy. Although they hed . to the rinciple 
they realized that three months of heavy fightine| 1 


80 that th Ks 
rege de del etme the offensive immediatly. 


mmand was now concentrating its 


forces on the junction of th 
f the Volunteer Arm 
8 Ne Don, The 0 der- in- Chief 7 mi the Arm 
ch to oppose this new enemy force, tg 


tin the interior; rebels under the 


sings Were breaking oy 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL r 


* se a 


w 


=- ao "A åE- 


— T E"n m e fh e 


i 


THE MARCH ON MOSCOW 


of the brigand Makhno Were sackin 
the trains ind commissariat depots, Re Tran CRN 


JOBE in the country. The local authorities | 2 
| had 

is BOE make themselves respected; abuse of authority wie 
pon l aet of tbe day; the agtanan quettion was more bitter than 
the ‘he Government itself knew Only too well what it 
rug to do about it. Its underpaid representatives were 


en dishonest. ~*~ 

Relations with the Cossack organizations, especial ly with 
k- Kuban, had not grown more cordial, Since Hes 
120 left —— fur n the Rada had me 
opic n cver, Was puttin heree 

— AS c Commander-in-Chief, shige Die ah 
spite of all our appareat successes, I thought the future 
st far from op sb ee that there was a rumour afloat 
ee political circles Was in Open opposition to General 
in poli on military and political — and that public 
opinion was backing me as his successor in the near future, 


eres", and, furthermore, 


CHAPTER VI 


THE REVOLT IN KUBAN 


n the evening, and as I had to spend the 
J REACHED Rostov in 45 L I took a screened box in the 


second tier 50 zs therin 
a very fashionable 9 eon d ya uniforms made the Civil War 
seem like a bad dream. i b 
: -eroa was over, the lights went Out, out the 
When the intery One of the actors a eared before the 


in di t oy a 40 
eS aa “aid 70 the audience: hilst we are here, 
laughing and singing, our brothers are fighting for the 


honour of Russia One and Indivisible, and for our safety. 
We owe our lives, our peace and quict, and our welfare to 
to their famous generals. Ladies and 


entlemen, one of these men, the hero of Caucasia and 


Tsaritsin, is in our midst to-night. 


have supper at ther i 
me there, I took refuge in an anny room, which was 
e 


immediately invaded by a crowd of peop ] knew, and some 
complete strangers as well, who 


drink with me. 
Amongst other questions I was asked: “What are 855 


relations with General Denikin? Is it true that you have 
broken completely with the Commander-in-Chief?” 

An invisible hand was fostering intrigues behind the scenes 
and sowing the seeds of doubt and confusion in all minds. 

As soon as I could get away I hurried off to the railway 
Station, hid myself in my carriage, and went to sleep without 
having had any supper. 

I arrived at Taganrog the next morning and presented 
myself to the Commander-in-Chief. He received me in the 
presence of his chief-of-staff. He was very pleasant, but it was 
obvious that he had something against me, and though he 
tried to be as cordial as usual, he was very much on his guard. 


Gih 


THE REVOLT IN KUDAN 
tor 


d asked f d 

de report an or orders. R aci 
oo ase on stv el he pny A a 
0D e Finally they eu tized me to limit mysel f of this 
150 t Tsarttsin, and the Commander: in-Chief i, efensive 
with “ip 8 invited me 

met severa young ofcers from the Mili 
1e eral Staff who were old friends sey Tool, > 
' see 


thë N losi N 
hat enikin, was osing pres amongst them 

but Can you not make hi them, I heard 
both hin to him. . “ im understand?” and “Can 


' After dinner I had a two hours’ /é/e-d-téte with Deniki 
n. 


pii dr 4 sudden change in our luck seemed to him to be 
only a question of time, and that the demoralized and 
could not make a stand agains 8 
wan, — he map: against us. Headded smilingly, 
Eren General R. is advancing with gi i 
hak iant Strides, and 
opdaess | a what troops he has! Lord knows what he is 
At this point his aide-de-camp b i 
“It is from General ——— =i 3 N 
rad it. “He says that the General Staff of 2 * 
which he has been attacking want to surrende l aor 
papu is demandin 4 this Arm should 4 — 
the flank of the other Red Army which is stati ed ans 
I drew his attention to the movements of hig T 
* rr his rebels, for they were threatening n 
i t a . — è g 
1 | oes 3 e will finish him off in the 
I listened i i : 
ace to him talking, my mind filled with doubt and 
_ The General was imi 
imation. He railed ot ig Smery about the political 
paying a double d a e ne 
á c, and against our neighbours th 
ans and the Poles, ad ge i K 
negotiations Ses 3 ding: J have decided to break 
they vill ger nocli em; I have informed them that 
Runin 5 g out of us, not so much as an inch of 
But he Was , 
a he gi even more exasperated with the “Separatists” 
in defo ne autonomous Cossacks, especially as 
. It is true that the demagogues in the Rada had 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL * 


103 
been getting more and more aggressive and were i 
0 17 AA General Denikin, but I still thought nr"? 
would be a simple matter to come to an understanding it 
the Kuban as a Whale. The majority ot the Cossacks were 

in sympathy with the Rada, and a little firmness was al] 

was necessary to deprive the brawlers of the assembly of th tt 
leadership; then we could treat with the Kuban on an cquit able 


basis on the subject of their autonomy. 
I gave the General my opinion quite frankly, and added that 


cost what it might, we must settle the question, or these mig. 

understandings would have disastrous consequences for À 

The Rada would become more united. We had got to seize hi 
resent opportunity for solving the problem. 

“Oh, quite—but how?” 

“We must respect the Kuban’s right to autonomy, and 
concentrate the executive power in the hands of the peer 
and hig Government, which will be responsible only to the 
local Rada, One of the deputies could propose this in the R 
and I am certain that the majority would agree to it a 
however, the extreme Left could make capital by &irring y 
. — I Elen that under some pretext or another the 
pion yee -T should be reinforced with thoroughly 

The General was thoughtful ; i 
out his hand to me be sid 1 195 vale he he i 

Tes penay I went to the Eobin. 21 

taman Filimonov, who i 
had suffered more than — — — pets 
Left in the Rada. But he was too cauti er 
dare to stand up to them; so ] did sip band a scoop a 
but went to his colleague, General Na ä 
r Jate 1 He viewed my 
leadership of President r . 
hardest to make a definite } ko, were working their 
information concerning the ne rn 
the Greens, who were still negotiations of the ists with 

I took the necessary 1 the Seorgian frontier. 
who was in command of the — gave General Pokrovsky, 
dar for the opening ee * Fike — 9 5 

o to i 
. cof te Red. I wrote to General n 
unless it became Meant 


vo THE REVOLT IN KUBAN 
105 


sile Headquarters’ bad strategy was beginn 

yasti ge 1 ha foreseen, the 8 had beginning to 
r AIE dt the junction of the Army of atrated 
121 00 Sens front on October 18th 12 Don and the 
re-btS å . i 

D oge HAY Romanovsky saying that the enen tad 
lern ed all hope of getting through our front li y had 
„pando ted enormous forces on the flanks of the Vol — 
ooncentrs 4 we had got to do something about it Amer 

7 an f quick! » 

Am) you spare us some of your Cossacks, or, better &i 
“Coul 7 general offensive in the north-east?” i 
em es ed that, as I had explained to him many a time 
; an could not age pegin an offensive; that it would 
little use to send a few t iments as h = 
e that my advice was: to take drastic 8 kk 
gaed ed force to efend Tsaritsin, and send all the rest of the 
+o reinforce the Volunteer Army. 
eadquarters would not agree, and kept on with their 
pali-measures, taking only two divisions. 

October 24th was the opening day of the session of the local 
Rada of the Kuban. I sent a telegram of welcome to the 
president. The next day I was just getting ready to go to 
Fkaterinodar when I received a most un ed telegram from 
Denikin; it read as follows :— 

In July the Kuban Government concluded an alliance treaty 
with the Medjilis (a mountain tribe), which is equivalent to 
treason to Russia. The Kuban Armies were to be put at the 
disposal of the Medijilis. This treaty was signed iy Bytch, 
Savitsky, Kalabukhov, and Namitokov. Order the arrest of any 
of these traitors you can find, and have them court-martialled 


for treason.— Taganrog, October 25, 1919. DENIKIN. 


One of the men mentioned in the telegram, Kalabukhov, 
was a member of the Rada, as everyone knew, and was in 
Ekaterinodar. Denikin ought to have known that the arrest 
of this man could be no light matter, nor could it be done 
without the san@ion of the Rada. A fresh collision between 
the Commander-in-Chief and the Kubanian Government was 
8 and obviously it was no good talking amicably 

revising the constitution with this conflict imminent. 
nerd Denikin had promised me complete freedom of 
nae given me carte blanche, to use his own expression, 
the he was confronting me with an accomplished fact in 
of this telegram! 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL. a 


t to Ekaterinodar to decide on the 
be 1 in the train and requested Genen 
what 2 and Pokrovsky to come into my carriage f 
—— them that General Denikin s telegtam had ee 
ike match to gunpowder. Ataman, Government, and R 
ike 1 furious. The local Rada, which had just been cony oked 
at elected Makarenko president by way of demonstration 
and had ordered the formation of a special regiment to Ruard 
the Rada. General Pokrovsky urged me to make a coup d 
dissolve the Rada, artest the miscreants, and have them shor’ 

T absolutely forbade him to attempt any such measure, and 
$ to gain time and take a few necessary 


er to the s ta 
——— I detailed the situation to Denikin, and begged him 


I me specifically what he wanted. 
"On October woth al the commanders of the Army as w ell 


as the Ataman received a circular telegram from the Rada and 
the Kuban Government denying the alliance which they were 
supposed to have concluded with the Medjilis. The accused 
had not had full powers of action, and the Kuban t 
itself was ignorant of the fact that any such treaty had been 
atranged with the Mediilis. If those implicated had really 
exceeded their authority, they were answerable to the Rada, 
who alone could judge them; a representative of the Rada 
could submit only to its judgment. Thus General Denikin's 
order was illegal and constituted an offence against the con- 
stitution. The Kuban Government demanded the revocation 
of the order. 

The same day I received a formal order from General 
Denikin: I was to adhere Strictly to his telegram. Therefore 
I ordered General Pokrovsky to have Kalabukhoy and the 
25 offenders 5 court- martialled. 

meeting ada had 
Makarenko's speech had conta the samen 2 
a single general with so much as a grain of h in his 
character in command of the Kuban ack * a ” His 
th — —.— even the Assembly itself to i — took 
; to adler dhe Kd Ataman ilimonov, who 
o address N following message: 

— ch the President of the Rada has 
whom the Comite generals, in the 

accepting your invitation. It 


THE REVOLT IN KUBAN 


F accord neither with my —_ 
aor of the Army of which f have 1 


105 


ty nor wi 
Onour Sj = s 


C 
perd e „fal Pokrovsky to x 
4 Gene y to carry out the nm 


nd to rder 
chid § 8 November 6th Gener 
ew 925 d 4 had handed Kote" 2 
cae avsky had occupied the environs of the | to him, General 
S da was sitting, cheered on by the € building in which 
the J ded to disarm the guard and arrest th ick ollen had 
Pe ads bed sent & eee the C — — 
s oller him a polite apology, and Makarenk der-in-Chief 
That evening Í left for Ekaterinodar, 1 v * 
the Mation by the Ataman, his collea ve, she as Peconi s 
General Stall, General Pokrovsky, an num members of the 
rhe Cossacks of the Guard formed a bene Peers 
j anticipated that this solemn reception i abies 
felt on the members of the Ra Kalabukhos b. * 
been condemned by the court-martial, and G eal Poke 
had ratified the death-sentence, which had na date 
4 dawn. The other prisoners ha inte 
p d not yet co j 
nent. The Rada had interceded for them, se Sey P ndg 
pihe Commander. in. Chief, N 
ter an interview with Gen 
| which was already in at k 1 8 e 
mended to make I had decided to avoid the po den side of 
the question as much as I could, becau l 10 1 
share the opinion of Headquarters on th K a e 8 
ds Temesed the Chamber, the Ataman Saeed 
Ne t welcomed me, and 
who had been atrested, So that th a e be pe fy th 
hel na ey might be judged by the 
e tribunal I made j 
great exploits of the Kuban peed iw ‘ships ch yes 
enering because certain dema 8 
N gogues were cutting off supplies 
ieee and the terrible condition the 
"Gen in if the Reds should return. In ion 1 said. 
nen poli In conclusion I said: 
Ader but po cs are none of my business. I am onl 
‘Beer ais Pein the trouble lies. The party 15 
individuals prevents the Ataman, the Rada, 


each 
one of you from doing all that you want to do for 


“= 
-i 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
106 


spite of all your goog 
[io SRI, bert 8 nothing Brothers. in- ri 
ere hen your Ataman and his overnment are 2 
ert of these brawlers, your children will want for noth 
Cun kevin for the front—can I say to m die did Men tha, 
Weir fathers and brothers, the ae of the local Rada, 
coming to their rescue like one —— PTERA i as 
The Assembly answered me wit 1 tell fein 
that!” and with cheers. I went back to my train. ; delegation 
from the Rada came to me there to intercede afresh for the 


prisoners. 


da could really be of some eure 
Ataman and the Rada could rea y be of some p to 
5 we would be only too happy to forget the past 


j ill, but can they do anything?” 
p 8 discuss the question I ha propounded there 
and then, and changes in certain clauses of the Constitution 


I telegraphed to General Denikin that I had promised to 
Spare the lives of those members of the Rada who were under 
arrest, 


Ataman Filimonoy, who had proved to be very weak, 
resigned. General Ous ky was elected in his stead. My 
mission being finished, Tank back to Taganrog, è 

he situation had Stown much worse since my last visit 


Volunteer Arm „and was now threatening the rear of the 
had been 


— P] . 2 
was ! drawing in on Kharkoy, Further back, the 


Province o 


towards Esthonia. In Siberia, 

brewing ren Army was in rapid retreat. The Storm was 
J made my report to the : . 

Sr ie Cad ke 


THE REVOLT IN KUBAN 
107 


i che necessity of sending not tw 

arte are to reinforce the Volentees A n * 
ile che told me to wait for him at Rokov, as 

M J be there shortly, and would then discuss the question 
ben me See b 
gih me din Rontoy was a very painful business, 

e * dissatisfied with Denikin, and — aed woe 
yore olf! faj- Maievsky’s V olunteer Army, which — c < 
rhe 5 ‘is credited. As Is usual in such cases, as one man — 
pleted more discredited, another became dearer and dearer 
ne peopl 3 Unfortunately, this other was myself." When I 
ot 1 house people crowded round the door; in the 
hey prevented me from eating; morning or 
[ was tected with the same ovations, and always 
eve ame questions: “Have you been appointed as 


“You are 

fore there was à great of gossip going abou 
R mischief-makers aa Oa from it a — 
hings dificult for me with Dent 

ee Ns ber sith I received a letter from the Commander- 
00 He wrote that, e 9 he had decided 
sap he not agree with my Strategical pro sals, 

ar” General Chati —— that the 


ov let me 


d to see the new Ataman. From there 1 went to my Head- 
“But 1 had scarcely arrived before a telegram recalled 


me to Taganrog. 

On the other fronts, things had gone from bad to worse. 
The Armies were in rapid retreat along the line. Already 
there was fighting near Kharkov. The concentration of 


which I had proposed a few days earlier was no 


loager possible. 
The disaSter that I had foreseen for so long seemed to be 


upon us at last. . . - 


Y 


CHAPTER VII 
DISASTER 


I. THE RETREAT FROM Knakkov TO Rosrov 


rog on November 23rd, although I was g; 

1 after 2 2 pert of fever. I went Straight from 25 
gation to the Commander - in- Chief, who said abruptly; 
“I beg you to take the command of the Voluntcer Amy,» 

I replied that I now doubted whether I should be of an. 


. ay 
in this position. Ev that I had suggested hither 
athe 5 by the ete) We could not even count — 
holding Kharkov, the crux of our Strategical position. 

He interrupted me. “I see what you mean quite clearly, 
But the loss of Kharkov will not injure your npada 

I told him somewhat dryly that I was not t ing about 
my reputation, for it did not need safeguarding, but about 
doing my job. I did not want to undertake what I believed 
was an impossible task, 

“Your refusal,” said Romanovsky, “‘puts the Commander- 
in-Chief in a dilemma. We are going to concentrate all the 


Ç 


I returned to my train and found Chatilov. m chief-of-staff 
who had rr received all the necessary information from 
e set about Studying the situation. It was 


ne be ces numbered one hundr igh 

— ET had huge reserves, The Voluntene Agere 
Cavalry was reduced 10 tuo thousand six hundred, and its 
fifty-one tho © 2 thousand men. These had to face 


he Supreme Gene 1 Sb teren thousand h 
ral : orse, 
: Staff was all its hopes on the 


DISASTER 


109 
of cavalry at Kupiansk. The Terek and 
of are ents there had suffered very heavily, but dhe Don 
gobas e ere Still intact and well mounted. 
ments agd advance on Moscow was still going on 
ry il ate 9 
ze U the hands of the 9 Command, Peasant revolts 


Hing o pehind the lines in the Governments of Ekaterino. 
er EINE and Kharkov, and Makhno and his bands —— 


P 
Ce al Chatilov agreed with me that the situation was 


ess. , 
day General Romanovsky, accompanied by th 
as sit Benet retutned to the . — He haid, 
a Mai-Maicvsky cannot hold out any longer: he has 
ost his or 
compe ted him: “Everyone knew that a long time ago 
+ Supreme Headquarters! I warned you of the danger 
ot dred times when there was still time to avert it, but 
n time you turned a deaf ear. And now that the danger 
jas materialized, you ae 5 save ear 

forget the past, eral,” said Romanovsky. “Let 

ah cals of the future. Make this sacrifice for Resa.” 

“ff I do, it must be on my own terms. I reserve the right 
y choose my ere especially ny ao 

The General agreed to everything I said. 

The following day I presented myself to the Commander-in- 
Chief, As I left him I asked him who was going to take my 
place as commander of the Caucasian Army. 

“General Pokrovsky. What do you think of him?” he replied, 

“He is very brave and very intelligent,” I said; but he has 
tot the necessary qualities for the commander of an Army.” 

The General smiled, “Once we have taken his cavalry away 
we him his Army will be no larger than a company, Only 
o give him for his chiet oE and. Wat do you think about 

| s chief-o . What do you think about 
Siegel?” 

45 en ~ nt man, by all accounts.” 

8 gar E if he was not, I should not have kept him 
duch kleene Ten he will not let General Pokrovsky do too 


to Jose all understanding of my chief’s mentality. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


On November 25th 1 left for Kharkov, taking a fi 
with me in addition to my chief-of- oS icy Office, 
The further north we went the greater the general co ik 

l 


seemed to be. The tailway stations were choked with tr. 
evacuating infinite numbers of refugees, including — 


perfectly able-bodied soldiers. 
These trains were full of the belongings of different res; 

inels on guard before one train. I saw Regi. 
car, I sent one of my aides-de-camp ne 
belonged to. He discovered that mar 


transport of their baggage. 
The stations W ing with refugees, mostly women 
and children—some ill, some starving, some in the lag 
Straits. 

Mai-Maievsky’s train passe 
Army. 

In one of the stations we found several ambulance-trains 
which had been there for days awaiting an opportunity to 

move on. Not far from the Station there was a hospital, 
destitute of staff, drugs, and nurses; in it were several is 
wounded, utterly destitute and literally dying of hunger. A few 
of them had dragged themselves into the street in search of 
a scrap of bread. My arrival became known, and two of these 

oor wretches crawled over to my carriage and implored me 
to help them. They told me that one of the officers there had 
just hanged himself in despair. 

At the principal points on the railway I left bands of 
soldiers with generals or colonels with plenary powers at theit 
head. They were to seatch all the trains going to the front, 
seize Stolen objects, send back deserters to their regiments, 
and shoot recalcitrants and marauders, Staff-officers Were to 
supervise the regular running of the trains. 

The dispatches from the cavalry generals were hopeless: 
They can be summed up in the words: “For the moment it 15 
impossible for the cavalry to fight.” 

y dispatch to the Commander-in-Chief, which I quote ip 
full, gives a mote ot less complete picture of the situation 4! 


the seat of war. 


d ours; he had already left the 


wre DISASTER 
iu 


ty DisratcH TO THE COMMANDER-IN-Chter 


your0v™™- N e December 9, 1919, 
i arrived here November 26th, and having acquainted 


Í if with the situation along the Principal sccui 
— 5 section of th 
have the honour to make the following communication 


ro you * 2 
vantageous position a ; 
disadvantag t the present time has two 


principal causes: 
n A strategy diametrically opposed to the rudiments of * 


art of warfare. 
1 Complete disorganization behind · the · lincs. 


la my dis atch No. 82, of April 4, 1919, I felt it my dury 
hist insisting on the advance on Tsaritsin, to draw your 
vention to the impossibility of simultaneous action in several 
lrections whilst we lacked the necessary forces. After we had 
aken Tearitsin, General Yusefovitch and I sent you two 
dispatches in which we indicated the necessity of occupying 
the short Tsaritsin-Ekaterinoslay front, which is defended on 
both its fanks by large rivers, and of concentrating three or 
four cavalry corps in the Kharkov area for operations along 


the shortest route to Moscow, 
This plan, to quote your own remark at our interview in 


Tsaritsin, was only dictated by my desire to be the first man to 


enter Moscow. 
When the enemy recently concentrated considerable forces 


near Orel, and began to put pressure on the Volunteer Army, 
General Romanovsky asked me, on October 17th, for some 
troops to reinforce our front line, 

I telegraphed on October 18th that “In view of the reduction 
in the efeđive force of the cavalry, the problem could not be 
solved by sending one or two troops”, and suggested a radical 
measure the sending of three and a half Kuban divisions”. 

My suggestion was turned down, and a hybrid measure was 
adopted: only two divisions were taken from the Caucasian 
Army. Later events compelled a return to the measure I had 
suggested; three and a half divisions have now been taken 
from the Caucasian Army, but the time that has been lost is 


irreparable. 
We wanted to do too much and make ourselves master of 
every position at once, and we have succeeded only in weaken- 


ing Ourselves and so becoming powerless. 
The Bolshevists, on the contrary, have held firmly to the 


ENERAL WRANGEL D 4 


MEMOIRS OF G 

i he concentration of forces and the ; 

P Strongest point. When the aching of 
Army’s advance on Saratov threatened the Bolshevig zucasug 
front the Red Command let our troops advance on EK, eastern 
Orel with perfect equanimity, inexorably followi Ursk and 
of concentration at Saratov, followed by a great ug the phy 
which would shatter the Caucasian Army and nde, attack 
to the south, weakened asit was by a thousand-kil Ow it back 
and the sending of some troops to other fronts omctre march 

It was only when the remains of the Ca ‘ 
retreated to Tsaritsin, powerless now to und ucasian Arm 
offensive, that the Red Command, unitin undertake a fresh 
defence of Moscow, began operations g its forces for th 
Army which was advancing without against the Volunt | 
mously long front, and turned it back bad along an — 

In spite of the transport crisis — r or- 
Red Command have carried out the other difficulties | 
* Ve 1 in its entirety principle of the con — 

e have bien advanciag cont z 
Steps to coasoli g continuously, but 
we have — our possession of the air, taken no 
ie have made migtakes from the S 3 
ve not a si . me wea of 
Therefore, if we 8 position nor a Se to Orel; 
place on which to fall baci retreat, we shall ha t of attack. 

The continual ad ck. ve not a single 

greater because of the me too vast. Disor ny's effective 
Headquarters howe t re-equipment ganization is all 
A opted; they dem which 5 

Head ps and take no esp have turned upreme 

cadquarters o share in it the over this du 
"da 8 7 
te-<equipment has d Mung to some a purpose. . 

Each unit Stri generated into means 0 growin è 
and seizes everything. Secure as pillage and =f Shs 
Profit. The rollin is sent back to hand. Wha or itself, 
— to the i 5 t cannot be 
. interior 
and sold at a 


DISASTER * 


e ofticers—have enormous sums of money i 
aast S as a result, there has been an — of de 
sess? gambling, oe wild Aeg — — several 

' cd officers have set the example of comly ban 
nights Pe — t money lavishly, for all the Army 8 | ais 
apd ha © fy organized police and counter-espionage systems 

Out d help to the Bolshevist agitators in their subversive 
1e nog dhe les Each of these two syStems works inde- 
volk g, of the other; the officials are both underpaid and 
gabie. ° . , 
result of the inadequacy of thcir salaries, the most 
of the railway officials quitted their pots w 
indien * arrived and went over tò the — 
the population greeted our Army with wild enthusiasm; 

have all suffered from the Bolshevists, and only want to 
wx) owed to live in peace, and yet they have to endure the 
be of pillage, violence, despotism all over again, 
Rent: sion at the front and risings in the interior. 

When 1 errived here, Kharkov had already been abandoned 

che General Staff, and the Army was in full retreat. 

e evacuation has been conducted disastrously, without 

ot order. None of the institutions were given directions 
plan oF the route they were to take, nor even concernin 
their destination. Everybody merely wandered off — 
found the railroads blocked by trains and abandoned ambu- 
lances without any staff, but full of sick and wounded who had 
eaten ing for three days. When I reached Slaviansk a 
wounded officer had just hanged himself rather than endure 
the tortures of Starvation. Crowds of refugees—mostly officers’ 
fumilies—are cramming themselves into all the trains and 
gations; no Steps are being taken to evacuate them, and they 
are literally dying of cold and hunger. 

On the road between Zmiev and Izioum, behind-the-lines, 
local bands are destroying the railroads, molesting the troops, 
and robbing the ambulances and | vans. 

I find that our forces have diminished; the 18 corps has 
about two thousand six hundred men; the sth, one thousand 
and fifteen cavalrymen ; the Poltava group musters one hundred 
foot and two hundred horse; the cavalry troop is about three 
thousand five hundred strong. Total: three thousand six 
hundred foot, four thousand seven hundred horse. The Kuban 
corps is a mere brigade; Kornilov's yrs are only bat- 

. Matkov’s two regi and “Special” brigade 
tave only their cadres left, and are out of achon. Of Dros- 
dovsky’s division, only three companies are left. The troops 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


refuse to use the tanks because they are afraid of losing ti 


is no Jon -one thousand foot, seven thousang 


enemy have Sity 
oe oa — than two hundred and six guns. 
Behind-the-lines we have only the remains of Alezeie,», 


e. men all told. 
sah three hundred on the march for months, withon, 
he Army is utterly exhausted. The horses have 
erefore we have often been forced 


sta 


od for a long while, and have Nearly 
all gone lame, whilst many of them ate ill from exhaufion, 
Most of the units are out of action, as their commanders can 


whe fatter truth is that there is no longer an Army. Measures 
are being taken to restore order to the interior, bases are bei 
organized; all the available contingents are being mobili 
but all these measures have come too late, and it will take a 
long time to create a new Army, 

he enemy realize this, and are doing their utmost to explicit 
their successes in every possible way. 

We must have the courage to see things as they are, to 
look the situation squarely in the face, and be ready for fresh 
ordeals. 

I consider it indispensable :— 

1. To adhere to a definite plan—that is to say, to choose 
one principal direction in which to concentrate our 
forces, and to be ready to abandon part of the occupied 
area if it should be è 

2. To evacuate Rostov and Taganrog at once. 

3. To choose bases behind-the-lines and fortify them. 

4. To cut down the over-large General Staffs and send 
surplus and useless personnel to the front. | 

J. To provide the necessaries of life for the families of 
officers and employees who cannot do their work 
out eno that their wives and children are safely 
VE OS en ger, and to organize colonies imme- 

diately for the families of officers and officials, 80 that 

the families can be provided with food and shelter 
of fety in case of danger, to transport them to a place 

10 e measures, ruthless if necessary to put down 

> bea Cie a aN wae and every kind af bunds and 

gher ranks, whose bad example is 


* DISASTER si9 
| corrupting the troops, whatever their military worth 


maybe: | 
rovide reinforcements of men and horses. To te- 
7- TO ib the cavalry, or this branch of the Arm will be 
cates y 
w . 


q have written many dispatches on this last point, but all in 

r the matter 15 extremely urgent. The enemy are using all 
er resources to create large cavalry units. Our cavalry was 
egablished and recruited without any kind of system, and it 
gill $008 fall to pieces altogether. 


8. To put the counter ionage Organization and the police 
force in order, to gamate them, and to furnish them 
with sufficient credits. 

9. To put the railways under military control, and to 
subordinate the head officials to the chief of Military 
Communications. At the same time to guarantee a regular 
living wage to the employees. 

To sum up, unless the above measures are put into force, it 
is impossible to improve our situation. Moreover, unless they 
can be put in hand immediately, I must request you to transfer 
the command of the Volunteer Army to someone else, for 
without them I can accomplish nothing. 

LIEUT.-GENERAL WRANGEL, 
Carlow, Chisf-of-Staff. 


I delivered this dispatch to the Commander-in-Chief zo bas 
and sent a copy of it to his two colleagues, Generals Loukom- 
sky and Romanovsky, begging them to urge as swift a decision 
as possible. General Denikin crossed over to the light and 
to read it. When he had done so, he put it down on the 
without a word, and looked at us despairingly. Then he 
said dully: All the same, we must go on with it.” 
“Of course, Your Excellency, and do our utmost to win the 
upper hand. But before we do anything else, we must come 
toa decision. The enemy are operating between the Volunteer 
o 
sea, Our ca is no longer capable of fighting. If you 
— — Amy of the 1300, 
we shall have to retreat with the enemy striking blows at our 
the the whole time. If, on the other hand, we retreat into 
Crimea, where we still have some troops 


i MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
1 


The General broke in: “I have been thi 


thinking it 
a long time, and I must follow the dictates of my cone for 


Í have not the moral right to abandon the Cossacks to thes 


fate, We must retreat together.” 
He asked a few unimportant questions and then dismiss. 
Chatilov and I walked along in silence. Us, 
“What is your opinion?” I asked him. 
Chatiloy shrugged his shoulders. They have log the: 
heads—they are no good for anything now,” “lr 
I could not forget the tragic expression on Denikin’. fa 
as he read my report. He had to watch the work into whist 
he had put his whole h collapse in an instant. It — 
certainly terrible for him. If he was to look the calamity © 
the face and still keep his sanity, he must know that he was a 
bearing this burden which fate had thrust upon him done 
It was essential that he should have the moral suppor of hi, 
closest colleagues. So I wrote to him:— 1 
Your Exceruexcy, i 
Atthis moment, when luck is against us, when the shi 
you are piloting between the rocks and the storm Are pie — 
of submersion by the foul Red waves, 1 feel morally obliged 
to tell you that I understand what you must be suffering, If 
at this crucial moment it lightens the load with which E Aes 
Stances have burdened you to know that you are not alone 
— . he who aie followed you almost from the 
i Wu Continue to share your joys and 
will do everything within my — to help 5 * 


December 10, 1919. P. WRANGEL, 
Some days later the Genetal wrote W 


December 13, 1919. 


Your 
2 — touched me very deeply. Your collaboration 
es uments lead me to hope that our luck will turn; 

k tit will turn. Your hearts cry has found ho in 
mine, and I wish you luck and success. gt 


PS—s DENIKIN. 
rest are in hand 


But at the 
about the 


— 


same time | ; 
evacuation of * — ind Taning had been done 


> 4 


98 


DISASTER 


ore, on the same thay that I receiw 
pohe Thiel é friendly letter, T alse, — the Com. 
i 0 D which he had addressed to alj the bates’ 
ee said that certain generals had allowed theme! it the 
Aro heir own Opinions in their dispatches in an — 10 
manner, threatening 10 leave the Service if their advice 
pot followed. In consequence the Commander-in-Chict 
ded obedience and forbade any future statement or) 


115 


sible 
wat 


ons. 5 ‘ 
— Headquarters’ new insttuctio 
— Army of the Don and myself to 
{th ible on the junctiom of ou 


ns Ordered the chief 
concentrate as itron 
r flanks and to — 


cavalry. 
the — * 855 Sidorin, commande 

235 — soon as I received these new orders, 

“Mon that I cannot possibly resume the offensive — post. 

h you. I am mot even sure that I can manage to effect 

wi ‘nq with your Army, as I have been ordered to do —＋ 

aie give me à helping hand.” 
ies, Supreme Headquarters have evidently failed to gra 
ihe situation,” said Sidorin. “I have petitioned them in vin 

ve received no explicit reply, Gal resterda i 
tur hà yy y my chief- 
dial asked General Romanovsky for information, and he 
of the ee Army the tre of 2 Ut. 
quads o — the two of them will be 
¢ to concoct ; 

As I had to go to Rostov shortly, I arranged with Sidori 
that he should come and meet me there; I also said char 
] wanted the commander of the Caucasian Army to come 
ilong and help us settle certain questions. I informed General 
Romanovsky of this by telegram, so that the Commander- 
in-Chief could authorize the commander of the Caucasian 
n peo to Rostov for a few hours. 

was a circular letter addressed to all the generals 
ofthe Army, running as follows: a 


The Commander - in- Chief cannot permit the of the 

acap to treat directly with one another, and forbids them to 
their Armies in future without his express permission, 

The front was drawing nearer and nearer to Rostov, and 


ber was keen anxiety in the town. There were open com- 


ri MEMOIR 
laints against the Commander-in-Chiet. He was 
Saving — responsible for the catastrophe; the . of 
shouted that he must be overthrown. Mtenrs 
As all such remarks invariably found their way to Denit 
attributed the circular telegram to them, and decided tenen. 
a frank discussion with him. I went to Taganrog. Th -l have 
mander-in-Chicf received me alone, without even his hie 
Kaff. After I had made my report, he tald me that ee 
decided to reduce the Volunteer Army to a single cor © had 
its junction with the Army of the Don was phen Once 
To avoid offending the Cossacks, he would be com ellen d. 
1 3 of these troops to Sidorin, chief of the 
As he attempted to be more explicit, ne 
was, for I thought he was perfectly a RE this 
I shared his opinion completely, and in the cire um thar 
I was ready to take any post he liked. If I pans wee; 
to the Army, perhaps I could go into the rear, or ab r 11 
— er need you here. eee 
our ce ency,” I said, “may I speak a 
to you? I believ : te frank] 
coyote T no Fonger enjoy fes fe Dat 
“What dò you mean?” h ey : l 
J have — had the 3 — are quite mistaken. 
have not reci + * ce in you. But you 
- procated it. You have done everythin y 
zl pohon. tiat relations. You have ien ne ＋ — i 
y that ve ha i n such a 
speek Have ze ne — 8 from my col- 
wr? you?” g but correct in my dealings 
“Your Excell 
tel — te Anoy forgetting your last circular 
with one another, How can xed slain: make arrangements 
of confidence in their loyalty? A „ 
— Base under the dain ae was Bones 
ive: ve acted in a way which ces. I could not 
oops. would have injured my 


2 got up. 

us say no . 

But I kn no more about it.“ H : 

Une co. HY Me puta e 
¢ of December, after a march of three hundred 


5 OF GENERAL WRANGEL s 


DISASTER 

n FE np 

during which the enemy was an our flank th 
the 


Kune. we at las effected Our junction with the A 5 
ibe a seily difficult retreat of U hich anny Army would have — 
te . 


i my task Was 
oe. The depots were on fire, the Station ball of —— 
i ct — for the 
ce he townsfolk, in a panic, were fleeing in ter ay 


gn u English officer found me, He told me that Su reme 
* jquarters had broken their promise and left without 
king with them the Staff and archives of the English Mission. 
ee cited taking the Mission in my train, but there was no 
m fot all the archives, and the Mission felt they had no 
night 0 ibandon them. I promised to send them a train from 
v an 50, s 
1 ound the Cornmandet. in-Chief's train at Rony; the 
r of the Army of the Don and the Ataman of Kuban 


vert also there. The Commander-in-Chief invited us into his 


hed not been there 2 moment when the English General 
Holman was announced, He was asked to come in. He told us 
thar he had just received a telegram from his Government 
which declared that ic was ready to help with the evacuation 
sod give its ꝓtotection to the families of military men, the sick 
and the wounded, 

When he had gone, the Commander-in-Chief acquainted us 
with the situation and gave us our orders, 

The s were to be concentrated in a fortified place 
chosen for the purpose. He added that since the fortifications 
were merely sket out, their value was purely psycho- 
logical. The Volanteer Army was henceforth to be an army 
ap incorporated in Sidorin’s Army. I was to go to Kuban 

the Terek to try and raise some troops. 

I asked General Denikin’s permission to take General 
Chatilov with me, and he gave it. I pre to leave the 
dert day. I was assailed on all sides throughout that day. The 
town was in a state of panic. Some people begged me to take 
then with me, others wanted to know why I was giving up 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


my command, others again complained of Supreme Hex 


quarters. * 
Rumours of sedition reached the Commandet-in-Chieg 


he, believing them, had the “Intelligence Deparint 20d 
documents seized and several of its employees atteste dent 
of the afheers denounced General Loukomsky, adjutant r, ORe 
Commander-in-Chiel, asserting that he was ar the h ead the 
the conspiracy against Derukin. It was soon proved th f 
these fears were Absolutely unfounded, but, deverhele t al} 
infotmer remained at his post—a confidential one the 
Romanovsky. Dies 

At this moment of imminent peril, Denikin continued 
busy himself with purely theoretical questions., On to 
ber i th he issued the following programme :— 


1. Rus One and Indivisible! Protection of teligion. R 
ettablishment of order. Increase in the productive — 
of the country and reorganization of national] econ. 
Greater productivity of labour. a 

. War to the death with Bolshevism. 

3- A military dittatorthip. This Government will ignore 
the demands of all political parties, and will crush any 
resistance to its authority be it from Right or Left, The 
ature of the Government can only be decided later by the 
people themselves. We must act in accordance with the 
people. A complete agreement with the Cossacks withour 
injury to the sovereignty of Russia. Rallying of Trans. 
Caucasia to Russia. 

4. Foreign policy will be national Russian first and fore- 
mom. Although the Allies are wavering, we must con- 
tinue to move with them. Any other grouping is morally 
censurable and impossible of realization. 

Slav solidarity, but not an inch of Russian territory to 
win help. 


A Cabinet was constituted on December 17th. It consisted 
of eight members, including the President, a Minister of War 
and the Admiralty, and Ministers of Finance, the Interior, 
Commerce, Justice, Transport, and Supplies. The Minister for 
Foreign Affairs and the roller-General were not in the 
8 but were directly dependent on the Commander-in- 


A Consultative Committee for legislative questions was also 
set up. 


SdOOUL AHL 40 JuNiwvaaa TYNIA 


TE (rr: DOL D 
i J , s — 


NOLLV1Ndou 
REVE KFT AHL Vi natd JHL 40 aunLyvaaa 


AVNÒ AHL NO mod vu IVYANAD 


* piven ee ewrert 


TEEGEE “er e 
rern 


nnn „ Hie Nys 


AOLYEVE,, L¥Ou 


ens ton IVEINTD,, MEsINeD SHI SANV F814 UWVOO NO tos AMY LSI BHI 40 4001 


DISASTER 


ARMY IN Irs Last Days 


yım THE 
{ reached Ekaterinodar wi 

‘ with Chatil 

ov 


den 
m Was already wei I found that 


bj 
ibe 0 i. , 1 — i 
, were well-disposed towards me, but Na known. The 
oumenko tol 
d 


CoS yr 
ot chat the Opposition were making th 
eagle een the Kuban Severe themselves bese’ 
ganten had begun again, tists and Supreme | The 
On January znd a meeting of the § eé Head- 
hud and fifty representatives f mon consisted mon of 
ud the Terek, and it was nied rom the Don. th of one 
for 2 ederated Cossack State. g to draw up à ae. Kuban, 
| was disagreeably surprised to nstitution 
he Kuban, and to discover that Ea General Chk 
sion 28 I. The Commander - in- Chi was there on 2 in 
misc resh troops. He was acc ef had d sexs c same 
assi ed to him by Supreme iAP paa by a e to 
mp and orderly officers, incl uarters and a sek 
Intelligence De ent who Ge uding two agents vee 
+o foigt on me, but for whom I a Romanovsky M the 
these two creatures had been s . use. I soon lear tried 
of informing Headquarters of — 8 with ie e 
went about telling all th y ons and mo 
vas hoping to mak ose who cared to li aina 
monarch e a coup d'état to listen that I 
- ys and that I was and re- establi 
san of Germany. an enemy of the Alli sh the 
bere these conditions I could es and a 
mission. not 
L —— me L Sa 
Gated tions I recei y recall. 
that General Chati ived a circular 
Army, had i tilov. chief. tele I 
y, had illegally qui 5 Of- staff of th It 
General Wrangel y quitted his post to go i e Volunteer 
tecei sedings to be tak e t ther ore 
p red the sime tele o taksa apua nai, gave 
hss a inar ea ilse. Chan station. 
General with me by Denikin 2 tilov had been a th 
man himself, i uthot- 
I came ovsky. , in the resen 
de x up with Denikin’ . P ce of 
cre already at e 's train after leavi R 
gups with the en emy ing ostov, where 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
1 verbal tt to the Commander-in-Chief on 
W 7 told him that the Cossacks were = 
altogether to be trusted, and that it would be much wiser * 
concentrate all the troops we still had on the caftern fy 
and then try to come to an agreement with the Poles, and. if 
possible, with Serbia and Bulgaria. Also, it was absolutely 
necessary to hold New Russia, i cost what it might. 

When I had finished, I gave him a written report, which 
repeated what I had already said briefly in pre detail, The 
General had listened to me in silence, and he read the report 
too without saying a word, a 

{ told him that in the circumstances which I had putt 
explained to him, it was impossible for me to perform the 


task he had entrusted to me, 


He was still silent. 
“Then you would undoubtedly refuse the command of the 


Kubanian troops?” asked Romanovsky. 

“Yes,” I replied, “for I should not be able to succeed. 
But I am ready to do my utmost anywhere where I can be 
useful, either in the Army ot in the rear. I should particularly 
e 77 gO to ee aes if the Commander-in- 

ief intends to fortify it. it is ut 
a an y it, I think gently necessary to 

“Certainly not,” said Denikin. “To fortify the town 
would be to admit the possibility of disaster. It would — 
a panic. 

I saw that it was useless to argue. General Chatilov brought 
out the circular telegram of which I have already spoken, 
i ace) said in Hews which he forcéd himself to control: 

ask you w is telegram means?” 

Silence, j 8 á 


3 aay It means that intrigues are still flourishing 
Romanovsky mumbled that there had been a misunder- 


ee: 


S 


DISASTER 
tag 


' o know me well eno i 

bees, J would not have hesitated to aa realize that if l 

wå par 1 do not know their source, and I do pory o cut 

scl gate kack, and that is enough, Do you want furthes 

go and bei Berl en 

dae i” said Denikin, “that in the present case 

wel MP his hand. you are 

t up out his I saluted 

a afterwards General Romanovsky mage 

aut the ynmander-in-Chief had decided that he must f ify 

s worossiisk after all, and that he wanted me to do —＋ 

de went to sce Denikin together, and in his 3 

rie of-Stall repeated what he had already said tome, I asked 
ssion to take Chatilov and some officers of my f s 
Staff with me. ; y tormer 

at do not suppose the Commander-in-Chi 

te e een a-Chief has any ob- 

Denikin a gesture of assent, Thro : 

gew be said not a word. It was the last —— ae 


with him. 
rr 
sways does at this time of the voit The tor n 
ctarsoever, the station and sheds were tp sche pe. 
of refugees, who were shelterless and exhausted r fatigue and 
. 
FFV 
arts and lorries. It made badder to é seve b fal 
cba par pe 8988 to sce these vehicles full 
dete dying, arms and legs hanging over 
General Loukomsky, who was actin j i 
i W g as chief of the Cabinet 
3 285 in 8 togethet with the othet members 
fetta foo 3 e administration of the town was in 
ae eider ae osere daa IS TTPO 
; at loggerheads, which all added to the 
With the , 
fing the co-operation of Loukomsky, we set about forti- 
Colonel ess sot koning upa plan for its evacuation. The 
could with oe English Missi on gave us all the help 
evacuation. He introduced me to a member 


ed MacKinder, who came to see me, 
He asked m 7 —— to speak uite plainly. He showe ge 
$ had received trom | ndon, notifying him e 

ing of a coup 4 rx to overthrow Benin, 
ours named me as his successor. The 
N charged him to find out the truth opts 
matter. : ; s 

thanked him for the confidence with which he 

maven! me, and told him that these rumours had i 
because certain people who wanted to sow discord ap. a 
cost, had been spreading them abroad for a long time. Some 
times, it is true, I did not share the Commander. in- Chine 
opinions, but that was on Srategical questions rather than 
on political matters, and since I was under his orders of a 
own free will, I would never, in any contingency whatsoey, on 
act against him. , l 3 

MacKinder asked me if he might communicate my rep! 
to his Government? I authorized him to do so. y 

The same day I sent General Denikin an official account of 
my interview with MacKinder, together with my answer to 
his questions. He did not reply. 

A few days later General Loukomsky was appointed 
Governor-General of Novorossiisk. This appointment re- 


leased me from my task, 


chief of the troops. It was obvious tha 4 
compel 8 e 8 us that we should soon be 


the troops in New Russia, had no i 
ic opini > no authori the troops; 
pbs pon wes causing for hs Ge ad D 
General Loukomsky asked mei 
- me if I woul : 
command. I told him that I would tike an consent to * on 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL * 


DISASTER 


f some use. He communicated 

„odd be rin-Chiel but Denikin refused to ippo 

Comme feerwards I received a tel 
spotty {gesting that I should a8 as its a 


= di 
a y t, on the whole, I was ready to a tee if — 
ee but that I wanted to * — gave 
pis 3 Commander-in-Chict ve his consent, J 

the first boat, w was sailing on Jan 
jave dhe meantime we learnt that our Ted crag) — 
P gat in New a 45 the Crimea, y 
Oe eril Holman showed me a telegram he had just rece; 
saying that Odessa would be in the hands of the Reds in : 


tay 


int me, 


few Dour cing General Romanovsk 
evemn al inovsky telegraphed m 

l Ta lead for me to join Schilling at 2 
be town had fallen, the post of adjutant to the commander 
of the forces had been suppressed. Another telegram from 

Denikin can my nomination to post of 
et of the Crimean troops. 

Realizing that w Supreme General Staf most emphatically 
id not want me, I sent in my resignation on Jan 27th. 
cae Chatilov followed my example. I left for Yalta. * 
Thad a villa, 

Aswe entered Sebastopol, the Admiral of the Fleet’s launch 

us, ane his chief-of-Staff, Admiral Bubnov, came 
oa board. He had come to request me to accompany him to 
the Admiral’s quarters, Siere T would find General Schilling 
who had arrived the evening before, and wanted to see me. 

He told me that the evacuation of Odessa had been a 
veritable nightmare. No measures had been taken to maintain 
even a semblance of order, In the port the refugees were 
kiling one another and committing suicide in despair. The 
settion of our Army commanded by General Bredoy had not 
been able to embark and was trying to get through to Rumania, 

E 

artour, and Slachtchoy was powerless to calm them. The 
Crimea was on the verge of complete disaster. 

The downfall was now very close at hand. The peninsula 
vas full of fugitives and the débris of various regiments. The 
bemor and the commander of the fortress of Sebastopol 

lost their heads, Powerful hostile clements were trying to 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
Qir up the le. A certain Captain Orlov, at th 
Aich large Faad, had declared war on the local rent OF 4 
and had adopted as his slogan: — otities 
3 put the interior in order before we can d ù 
Orlow had suddenly scized the town of Si 
imprisoned the chief-of-Saff of the Crimean Anteropo} 
commandant of the fortress of Sebastopol, The civil, — 
was powerless and had done nothing. govemor 
Slachtchor had ousted Orlov trom Simfe 
, topol, and i 
consequence he had withdrawn into the mountains. h n 
he was advancing on the town of Yalta. He Sioa ence 
supporters in — country. , 
anks to Slachtchov, we were Sill holdi : 
Perekop, which joins the Crimean . N hd 
north ; 2 it was obvious that we could not cnatimse 90 tall 
it for ong. We had suferedhesry losses, and had come to the 
My first i ian of Schillin 
big, well-built man with a frank ateni Def He Was a 
I want to speak 10 you, not in my ca . pS ie 
—— of this place, but as one officer of the Guard to 
another. You probably know we E 
Odessa. I Dall dover be fo frets ee been happening in 
but I have already realized they arrived here to-day, 
Thus {cannot —— are le to me here too, 
* ready to give up my n at * of the troops. 
replied that I had alread — 
but thar the Commander in Pheer hu wel for the post 
ment, and that, furthermore, I had mid. vetoed my appoint- 
expecting my discharge at any mamemm Peper and was 
i As Schilling and Nenukov (the Admiral 
added that, even were I anoei ral of the Fleet) insisted, 
relations with Denikin woul 18 ed, it was obvious that m 
inevitably lead to friction, whi 


found Sele whole campaign, 

the first general onder in diger F at my hotel. He told me that 

ment to the Volunteer Aia announced my appoint- 
x x Stressed him very deeply: 

you could take exception” not à single word in 255 i 


“You declared qu 
Tie clearly and openly that you intended 


+ DISASTER 


. ciless towards drunkards and 

wv b et ys Was aimed at me.“ 
6500 „I failed to understand, he tried to be 
700. de. im ang by you must Icave no go 
ry eft no means by which vou — ack = 


fi 
Fat ener he said, “wha 
, » W i i 
ar t Balsheriss and or ea 2 the whole difference 
iis OWN Question wit . 
his answer 7 — le. bout pausing, and he 
0 ot the whole difference simply that th i 
— ed about their means, oh 9 
pe upper gu iink aai 
t day I met Schilling again. He seemed 
sed, and told me he had decided that his 1 hee) 
zoundless and that the . were not hostile to him after 
fi assured him that I would forget that we had ever had our 
naversation of the previous evening. 

A few days later I received a telegram from General 

chilling announcing that the fortress of Sebastopol had been 
in a State of siege. An hour later came a second 
segam with duplicate copies for all the authorities. It 
Cered me to take command of the Aluchta, Bakhtchigaray, 
areas, and warned the local authorities that in 

dare they were to take orders from no one but me. 

I telegraphed to General Schilling immediately, saying that 
a the circumstances it was dangerous to divide he com- 
zand, and that I could not assent to his proposition nor take 
wy command without the consent of the Commander-in- 
Chief. I begged him to cancel the instructions he had given to 
the authorities, 

The same day Captain Orlov published a proclamation :— 


To officers, Cossacks, soldiers, and sailors! The whole of 
the numerous garrison of Yalta has come over fo my side, 
including a 1 of several hundred men, complete with 
artillery and machine-guns. General Schilling wants to negouate 
With me, but I will not enter into any discussion with this man 
eat he has brought to life again all those men whose deaths he 
caused in Odessa, I hear that our new leader, General Wrangel, 
itin the Crimea, He is the only man with whom we can and 


— d 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
E 


' otiate. He is the man in whom We all have 
Ae will sacrifice everything in the ary le SOM ble 


hevists and those who are corrupting the f 
aq ret "Wrangel—the strong man 49 the mighty Rey 
immediately sent the following te Sram to Cin.. 
Odor and duplicates to Schilling and the local authorities 
urging them to publish it in the newspapers :— 

I have noted the proclamation ia which you declare that = 
submit to my authority, although actually I am holdin aN 
command whatsoever. Until recently, the Army has — 
invincible solely because it knew how to obcy its leader, 
blindly. Having forgotten its oath of loyalty, it has Come 
to Civil War. We have renewed the struggle Of our Own, 
free will, and of our own free will, which 18 equivalent to an 
oath, we have put ourselves under the orders Of dur Superiors 
Neither you nor I have the right to be disloyal to 
spor as an old soldier who has served his country loyally 

his life, I earnestly beg you to put an end to your rebellion 

it to your immediate superiors. 
1 heard that General — the Commander: in- Chief; 
> ＋ 

5 


© commandant of the fleet, 
and many others had written iki : 


a 
aterlon un the 


repeatedly to Denikin, begging 
him again and again to appoint me as Schilling’s Successor, 
but all in vain, The Commander-in-Chief was determined not 
to give his ass ent. 


Supreme Headquarters had 
ide, 


the ish dship sent me a 
ess Message from General Helis, Buse thus :— 


DISASTER iia 
will endeavour to arrange meetin - i 
kin, but he F- not come unless "of praca Mii 
ikin’s final decision regarding his fu 
Dent paring ture move- 


¢ future of Russia 
adherence 


opakt. He must be prepared to state publicly his 
15 s 


to ben ties now usin tus name. Holman trustin 
iy as enough for length of coming to Novorossiisk. If 


1 jay. Inform me time of arrival as soon as possible. ; 


me I was incapable of understanding anythi 
By this requested Chatilov to go to Holman thant him — 
deni and tell him that since I had committed no crime 
Tha no need of puanatiters OF see condnd, and that T con- 
.it absolutely useless to vindicate myself to Denikin, 
sdered m but returned the next to tell me 
Admiral ur, the Commander of the ish Fleet, 
iyi told him that General Denikin was demanding, via 
that I leave Russian territory immediately. 
| wrote Denikin a letter, Written as it was in anger, it 
otained personal allusions here and there, but it gave an 
xunte history of our misunderstandings. I recalled to him, 
oing documentary evidence, the many occasions on which 
F lute policy and 
de inevitable his faulty strategy. I had more 
hun once extricated him from the morass into which his un- 
fortunate opinions had landed him. I wrote that if catastrophe 
C 


fined to obey him, and he was etless to force me to 
do sò; but abies since he imagined that resence 


to eave Russia of my own free will. 
plat copies ofthis letter to Holman and to all those whom 


had dismissed because he had realized that they were 
and I left for Constantinople to join my family. 


U N Eyre 


l had 
never been to Constantinople before, and I was 
ahh its beauty, T spent the dare rambling through the 
K 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 3 
110 


its suburbs. The English had offered hosti: 

ah onion the Island of Prinkipo, so Chatiloy and T wit? 
to the Russian Embassy, where our military agent pu, 8 
gudy at my disposal. The great rooms in the Embass Yes 
full of refugees who had come to obtain visas, or ask for On 
and — Most of them were absolute] 
Americans, Englishmen, Frenchmen, and Italiane d al 
come to the rescue and 5 food and shelter for them 
We also were penniless, but I managed to obtain a loan Seo? 
the bank. I did not wish to impose on the generosity of — 
Allies any longer than was necessary, so once 1 had Obtained 
the loan, I decided to go to Serbia. ak 

An incessant stream of refugees was arriving from Novoros. 
siisk. They said that life there was one long hell. The latest. 
comers told us that the town was crowded with troops and 
refugees; the enemy were shelling the harbour, which was full 
of the unhappy wretches who had leapt into the Water in a 
panic, only to die there. 

The Commandes-in-Chief was re ECS discredited: he 
had zamla 9 dismiss 8 85 his dente o Staff, to’ 
appease the public anger; he im General 
Miko He had heen Sosed to — himself 127 English 
troops, and on March 14th had boarded a torpedo-boat bound 


or the Crimea. He 


. y before our departure for Bel e, the English 
High Commissioner, 9 de Robeck “had invited — to 
i received a wireless message from 
General oo — ‘ore that Denikin had decided to give 
summoned a Military Council at 
— — elect a new Commander-in-Chief He requested 
fen got and take part in it. This tele seemed just 
a € Strange to me! I had been ismi ; Denikin had caly 
8 deman exile, and here he was summoning me 
— Aree on which’) ection of the Commander-in-Chief of 
understand ie was no longer a member! | could not 


DISASTER 


ne Denikin’s resignation also, H 
pant es, either to enter into an open 8 Soy two 
deten ind superior officers, or to resign, Ger, Desi 
rert? 
Te | : ly k 
yA conversation, the telegram so haunted me, I had a 
ap 
bta 


id. “If you wish to go to Sebastopol, one of our shi 
be sat our service. I am very well informed on the Chimess 


the hopelessness of the cause; I doubt whether anyone 
— save it. I have just received a telegram from the Enolish 


Read this before making your decision.” 
He handed me the following note addressed to General 


SECRET, 

The British High Commissioner in Constantinople has been 
ordered by his Government to make the following communica- 
uon to General Denikin :-— 

The Supreme Council (of the Allies) is of the opinion that, 
oa the whole, the prolongation of the Russian Civil War is the 
nos disturbing factor in the present European situation. 

His Britannic Majesty's Government wishes to suggest to 
General Denikin that, in view of the present situation, an 
‘trangement with the Soviet Government for an amnesty for 
x Crimean population in general, and the Volunteer Army 
u particular, would be in the best interests of all concerned, 
wand British Government is absolutely convinced that the 

donment of this unequal struggle will be the best thin for 
Russia, and will therefore take upon itself the task of making 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL > . 
tes P 
s has General Deniti.» 
this arra t, once it ‘ ral kin’s 
it offers him and his principal sy — 
: Pporten ko 


P Tbe Brit has, in the pack, given hi 

British Government has, in the past, given hi 
ene of assistance, and this is the only reason why large 
able to continue the Struggle up to the present; — 


‘ustified in hoping that he will accept their 
1 Denikin ci should feel it his * P osal, 1 
and to continue a manifestly hopeless Struggle, the Baa 
Government will find itself obliged to renounce all tish 
bility for his actions, and to cease to furnish him With ane e. 
or subvention of any kind from that time on. help 


Burristt Hich Cox 


CONSTANTINOPLE, 
April 2, 1920. 


Enoland’s refusal to give us any help in the future rob 
. K Sr ld hope. Bat L had made up my mind, bed 

“Thank you for having warned me, Admiral,” I ssid, 
„Until this moment I was still r but now I have 
no doubts. If I am chosen, it is my duty to accept the 
command.” 


Admiral de Robeck, obviously much moved, wrung my 
hand. I decided to leave the same evening, so went to say 
good-bye to my family. 

Once again I must take the opportunity to mention my 
wife’s moral courage. She was certain that I was going to my 
doom and that we should never meet again, but she made 
no effort to detain me; she said only that duty was the mog 
important thing in the world. 

chatilov was overcome with dismay when he heard of my 
decision. “You know that it is an impossible fight: the Army 
will cither be killed off to the last man, or it will capitulate. 
2 will r for ever afterwards. You have 2 

every except spotless reputation; it W 
madness to co shar ton i p 
But when he saw that my decision was unalterable, he told 
me that he was coming with me. 
sod sailed fe the Crimea, ee Ea of Tadig on Ma ea: 
r the re, i e epilogue 
che beuge was to take place, t seemed, the epilogu Y 
next day this same man-of-war was to put in 
Feodossia to take General Denikin on board; he — leaving 


* 
m 
4 


Y DISASTER 
. 133 
Ooadanüincple without even having bid his tr 


bre! nan had been most courageous and quite n 
pem the old days of the Great War, but he had gradually 
analtogether different person, He ; 


arri 
tinople, where his wife was awaiting him tnd 2 
ip oe eral Romanovsky went Straight to the Saeed € 
1 5 Whil& he was talking to our mili an 
pabis. 


: s tary agent, G 

iev, Romanovsky waited for him in an adie i — 
Ae meone went into this room he found that — 
yhen been assassinated, Nobody had heard 


the shot, b 
and a Sister of Mercy had been seen hurrying dows 
be Saal Denikin’s wife, distratked with fear 


i begged General 
who had just arrived, to send some English soldiers 
die Embassy to guard her husband, Our military agent 
e Denikin to pereas our Stn bassy from being occupied 
E eign guard, but in vain, The Embassy was occupied 
ind the doors guarded by sentinels, At the Mass for the 
ghich was said d that evening, Was present, surrounded 
by English soldiers. 5 : 2 
The next day, without paying his last respects to his friend, 
te left for England. 


Beronane, July 31, 1923. 


—ů — 
Ses — 
res | ~ 
f . 


PART II 


* THE LAST STRIP OF NATIVE SOIL 


PART II 


CHAPTER I 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 


A Ay ig white and glittering on the hills that surround 


zt people + | 

by: * small sailing and rowing boats were crossi 
ne Ares pbene was so normal that it was — 
ge PY o realize that this beautiful town was on the 


sper. ids boat flying the St. Andrew’s flag came along- 
‘seit’ te the bade on to the bi He told 
Ei de bad been sent to me by the comman t of the 
ge H chat a suite had been reserved for me on the cruiser 
ise Kornilow. I ordered my luggage to be trans-shipped 
seemuiset, and decided to go ashore at once and see General 
. Dragomirov, the dent of the Military Council. 
‘ocneding to the officer w. o had come to meet me, a meeting 
the Council had begun at midday in the Grand Palace, 
der the commandant of the Fleet had his quarters. General 


gov was there also. 
the frst acquaintance I met after landing was General 
dur, commander of the Caucasian Army. This Army, 
of Kuban and Terek Cossacks and some of the Don 
Cosacks, had not been able to embark, and was retreating 
= epee of the Black Sea on the Sotchy and Tuapse 
' an enormous crowd of refugees was following it. 
Ganl Ulagay said that the number of Kubanians and 
cugees amounted to * thousand; in addition there were 
itn and there ein hoping that they wou 
was little use in hopi t 

Rp serious resistance to the enemy, Oficers as well as 
Tey showed great hostility towards the “Volunteers”. 
proached General Denikin and the Volunteet 


* 


sewors OF GENERAL WRANGEL y 
60 having seized all the ships and escape; fto 
regiments" for ripe the Cossacks to their fate, th 
the Crimea, oper retreating across a mountainous Country 
The Cossack were vety primitive; they were bei 
' Boudennyi me his e fore: 
er in numbers to ours, but greatly hearen: 
ipa ir Te Kuban and Don units had abandoned — 
of peir transport, the necessary provisions were unobtainabi, 
: = Fong, and both men and horses were weak from 
as they fr was Kill very early spring, and the grass had only 
hunger. n to come up, so that the horses had to cat wi 
E — d gnaw the bark of trees, The Cossacks had con. 
seated the people’s last reserves of food, and were living og 
horse-flesh and the maize which had been gathered in at the 
last harvest. ‘ Sotchy 
Ulagay had left his army near Sotchy. ently, 
mee td Goien out amongst members of the Roba’ 
Rada. The number of voices clamouring for negotiations with 
the Bolsbevists was increasing; others proposed that Georp; 
should be asked for help. General Bukretov, the Ataman of 
the Kuban, and the engineer Ivanis, President of the Kuban 
Government, had started for the Crimea. 8 
I asked Ulagay: Does our numerical superiority entitle 
us to hope for at least a partial 9 recapture of 
Novorossiisk—which de * a revictu: a possibi 
Once we have re-established and re- or our forces 
there, could ve not attempt to take the lnitiative out of the 
enemy’s hands?” 
But General Ulagay answered me with a discouragin 
gesture. “We cannot do 7 the Cossacks will not fight: 
ely 


Then I realized clearly that the situation was hopeless. The 
officers had lost their nerve as well as the Cos , and we 
could not rely on the Cossacks to continue the struggle. 

Nearly twenty-five thousand Volunteers and ten thousand 
Don Cossacks, including those from behind-the-lines, had been 
sent down into the Crimea. The Cossacks had arrived without 


ications 
here communica j 


thet Genel ae re th rage such a condition 
e - 
fhe Ataman of the Don, and General Sidorin, Goenka 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 


. * 
rmy, to drop his plan of entructi ence 
h Straits and the shore of the Sea à pans the 


Kette? “decided instead to reimbark them immed: 
dg tn Eupatoria es bee . 
nd g eit ums. s : 
gol ON prer regiments had arrived in a similar conditi 
de phe disorganization : the cavalry had no horses, and all 
en en and Fek very bitter; for tbe mek pr fe 
x ; itter; fort 
gea ver thelr officers any longer. Under tien con- 
rie the contingent from the Volunteer Army no longer 
ddos d an lee fighting force, 
front was being held by General Slachtchov’s units, 
i bad deen amalgama and now formed the Crimean 
3 This Corps . 2 innumerable remnants of other 
ops eg and embryonic ones—general stafi: 
mniitasy eof the. line. There were quite fitty infantry: — 
ey sits, and not N done five pares five hundred 
ats chtee thousand bayonets and two thousand sabres). 
oon a the 13th Soviet Army on General Slachtchov'e 
— and its effective ae 3 thousand bayonets 
‘ee thousand sabres. Under these conditions General 
od thee „a ſorces were sufficient to defend the isthmuses; 
but the disparities in the make-up of the various units and 


r lack of preparation, as well as the enemy's gradual flow 
2 which our scouts 9 our 

ition less secure than it at fits sight eg owe] 

found General ae se at the Grand Palace. The 
netting of the Military Council was due to begin in an hour’s 
time, so he hastened to tell me of the most recent events. 

There had been too many people at the Conference which 
lad met the evening before. In spite of all General Drago- 
pek: es it Wr failed to 5 a definite aa 

ge number of the participants refused on princi 
to discuss the oe the dlefticn of s guecentoe 6s Hi 


that General Denikin should appoint his successor. 
General Slachtchov withdrew from the Conference and left 
— on the pretext that his presence was needed at the 
bin I resentatives of the Crimean Corps left with 
the Conference, General Dragomirov communi- 


MEMOIRS OF GUNERAL WRANGEL * 


140 D $ 
the first meeting to General Denik; 

cated ehe aa o told him of the views which had Whe 

was * sed. Bur General Denikin categorically Pefuse 

appoint a successor, and repeated his demand that the Milin 

Gaeil should choose a new Commandet-in-Chief. tary 

I personally considered it absolutely inadmissible thas 
new Commander in- hie: should be cleGed by his fury’ 
subordinates, and a nomination by General Denikin ioe 
to me to be the only right way of securing the SUCCESS. 

I told General Dragomitov of the English Ultimatum, tha 
Thad brought. 

“What with the information I received at Constanti le 
and the news I heard from General Ulagay, and the Alb N 
decision to give us no further heip, I see no possibili of 
continuing the struggle,” I told him. “I have come 
because I cannot refuse to share with the Army what ate 
perhaps, its last hours, and if fate calls me to the leadership of 
the Army, I will accept the ordeal. But I do not think thar 
General Beal bas the moral d ht to abandon the work 
which has been entrusted to him. It is his duty to finish 
work and to take full responsibility for whatever happens,” 

“The Commander-in-Chief has definitly decided to resign, 
Lam sure he will not change his mind,” answered General 


Tie acta meetin 
el room, in which the ing was to be held. 
was gradually filling up, Noises, voices, and the trampling of 
many feet 2 N Prt aide-de-camp had brought in 
some papers t ajar, and I could 
a 8 5 men or — * 
That's not a itary Council, Your Excell „it's 
Soviet,” I said. “I do not think it will be possible to kide the 
t On Masch 29, 1929, General Denikin wrote to General Dragomiroy + 


COMMANDER-IN.CHIERF OF THE SOUTH RUSSIAN ARMY 
No. 145, March 20, 1920. 


bao ren ee ts d A and ia bs 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 101 


z from the Conference, and they radically transform 
Pie zitustion. ? . 
A gh? Je ad the English Note. “The new Commander-in- 
I wen ever be may be, ought to know exactly what his 
gió. in arms cx of him under the circumstances ; they 
jes” ught to know What their new chief can 
— It is AEF to * the issues in such 
ing, and in one composed so largely of yo 

Thu ber . re imental commanders here — in Pas — 
pre id y be lieutenants. I think we ought to weed 
mes WO" ne Council all those below the rank of Army Corps 


pot der or its equivalent.” 
Dragomirov agreed willingly. He dismissed all the 
com of the Council I suggested, and requested the superior 
peo come into his Study. The news of the English 
ratum everybody: all realized its gravity to the 
Ult ind became gloomy and silent. General Dragomirov 
anounced that General Denikin was still insisting on the 
"egion of his successor. But all the membets of the Council 
ail considered this course to be inadmissible. 
The president of the mecting proposed the following 


* The superior officers should meet in unofficial conference, 
discuss their views, and suggest the man whom they thought 
most capable of doing what was to be done; General Drago- 
coving CT, then report their decision to General Denikin, 
emphasizing, however, that the opinion of the members of this 
meeting did not bind the Commander-in-Chief in any way, 
and suggesting once again that General Denikin should pro- 
mulgate an edi& appointing his successor. 
I asked ission tò speak, and explained once again 
what I had already told General 8 under the 
t conditions I could not see ay ope of a successful 
trugele, The English Ultimatum had destroyed our last hope. 
We had now to drain the bitter cup to the dregs. In these 
citcumstances General Denikin had no right to leave the 
8 My words were received in icy silence, and I saw clearly 
the question of General Denikin’s resignation was already 
headed as settled by all present as w as by the General 


ie ee if General Denikin leaves the Army,” I con- 
and the heavy cross falls to one of us, that man 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGpy 


ought to know exactly what his electors expect of h; 
he accepts the post. I repeat that I do not think t im bes 
Commander-in-Chief can possibly Promise a viĝo at the ne’ 
The most we can demand of him is that he kee o riouz j de, 
honour of the * flag which has been ent 
Army. It is true that I am not so well acquai to, 
— situation as everybody here, and maybe | Wit th 
its hopelessness. But I believe that it is essential to be derne 
the question before we do anything else,” Clear on 

No one said a 0 1 3 

At last General Makhrov Egan to speak, gar; 
although there seemed to be no way ers 8 100 that 
situation, we ought to continue the Struggle; „8 
have a hundred-to-one chance, we ought not 
arms.“ 

“Yes, Peter Semenovitch, you wo G 
Chatilov answered, “if we had even one chanc 6. perl 
think the enemy has not only ninety-nine chances, but Es Ut I 
nine, and then nine more... .” Cty. 

General Makhrov had no answer ready, 

I had no doubt that the members of the Conference Would 
choose me. The die was cast, I had said my say; the rest dig 
not depend on me. I pleaded fatigue, and asked General 
Dragomirov's permission to leave the meeting, 

My heart was unbearabl heavy, and I wante 
so that I could think clear 


Stroll in the town, see 
boulevard, and 


Our 
Ong 23 

WY 

to lay down our 


uld be tight,” 


a sympathetic listener, 


en I remembered a visit I had 
Bishop of Sebastopol, 


ly then also, and I had enjoyed a 
cordial conversation with Mg 


my mind considerably, 
I decided to go and see him now. He had already heard of my 
arrival and s : ; 


5 in coming here. God has inspired you; it 
Was your duty,” he said. “J know how terrible it will be for 


THE CHANGE OF POwWpR 
100 
are assuming. But 
du must sacrifice 
your heart and to 


row the weight of the burden yoy 


og? 
mei yout hands. Before you artived here, and 10 ative 
d mme tel 
“ nen wrote to him nominating you tary “Duncil, — 
< bodox clergy 


z i social r . 
ament, here are copics of two such — 
S. 


Benjamin tutned over the 
bene unage of the Holy Virgin, framed in gold Si back an 
2 He came over to me, adorned 


i eats. | 
eit p Ade up my mind to bless you with this Image as soon 


heart. My mind was once more at rest i 
a to fate aky, went back lathe Cant a8 m 
The Conference d been over for some time. The 
‘ae had been fixed for six o’cloc ning. The 
necting k that The 
7 
i 0 i 

* . 

4 uetassimov, the commanda 1 ae 
ae to lunch. I questioned him as to 3 * 
reserves of coal and oil which the ships would — in hes 
of a forced evacuation. His answers were most unsatisfactory 
These was enough tonnage in the Crimean ports, but — 
N t out to sea. So far from there being reserves of 
and oil, the ships had no supplies at all. Nor was there 

any possibility of lighting up the warships with electricity. 
aps you will not belicve me,” added Admiral 
ö a N, but we cannot even put the tugs under steam 
eps ips into the roadstead. If, God forbid, there should 

H sater at the front, no one will be able to escape.” 

Boned o'clock, the Council of superior officers met again 
renal aarp) of General Dragomirov. I announced 
ae he zy a chosen me as General Denikin’s successor; 
these t my comrades-in-arms had put in me in 
terrible times put me under a twofold obligation. I muĝ 


— 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL = 


r44 
uit that trust to them and to myself. Before 
fene to make sure that I was able to do what mene 
of me; as I had already pointed out, I had no right to Ade ; 
them victory under such conditions as then prevaj led- Etmiş, 
vi&ory was impossible, J could promise them on! ind 
that I would not lower our colours before the A 
would perish first. J egret to keep the honour r We 
Russian flag intact until the end. Of the 
“The English have decided to withdraw from the 
I said. “If we reject their mediation, our refusal will ‘eam, 
hing their hands of us and wit desi 
altogether. I will most certainly never countenance negoti i 8 
between ourselves and the Bolshevi‘ts. But I think the ions 
important thing is to avoid giving England an PPortunity : 
leave us in the lurch. We must throw the odium of th to 
d prolong them until we bax 


negotiations upon e an 
attended to our fortifications, put the Army and the rear 
order, and secured coal and oil for the Fleet in case of an 


. If you approve of my ideas, will 


evacuation. . - à 
formulate in a special resolution the tasks you wish to dele, 


gate to the new Commander-in-Chief. 
I suggested that it should be drawn up there and then, 80 
General Chatilov took it down at my dictation. 

At the Conference of Superior Officers, originally the Mili- 

tary Council, which met at Sebastopol on March 22, 1920, 

by order of the Commander-in-Chicf, to elect a successor to 

General Denikin, Cavalry-General Dragomirov, the President 

of the Council, read the British Government’s Ultimatum to 

General Denikin; this urges him to cease the unequal and 

hopeless fight, promising him that if he does so the Govern- 
ment of Great Britain will propose to the Soviet Government 
that an amnesty be concluded for the Crimean population, with 
special reference to the South Russian troops; but it States cate- 
gorically that if General Denikin refuses, the British Govern- 
ment will give him no support or help of any kind. 

Therefore the Conference has expressed a wish that the 
Commander-in-Chief should appoint General Wrangel in his 
place. Once he has accepted the Supreme Command, he will 
negotiate with the Allies to secure the safety of all those who 
have fought against the Bolshevists, and to make the most 
favourable terms he can for those individual members of the 
Armed Forces of South Russia who do not consider it advisable 
to trust to the Soviet Government’s guarantee of security. 


One thi n 
1 
ene ag; 


a pretext for was 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 
t43 


ri ht to expect ( cone! 
p hav Oe in, at all events — Ba you will all 
tee. and thus share with me the heavy Se ith which 
60 ssi people which I have accepted at ponsibility 
be folly aware af the weignt of this — request, 
| — Ps tO reconsider the whole matter just once bility, and 
te Council Chamber and went ito a ame 
t fue romney — . by, and gill the Sin 
„pia ed. Every } ns could hear snatche Of 
8 muted conversation the) were arguing, At last the r ot 
— Genera! Kp the commander of the ne 5 
S nasty, Ce N: 
Caillou come in. Your Excellency? We can decide nothi 
vitbout you, he ae sgap a 
pot what Cg that no One 
Hell, whilst a g that no one can 7 
fot anybody else, there are some members vin vil 2 


de aas wE ’ * è 
M bo are th ? I uestioned. 

cen 8 a bing ne Ulagay.” 

hardly knew Gene urbin, the comman 
fortress, but the gallant and noble General Ula epee fer 
well known to me. I did not suspect him of lack of divin 
gonge; 1 had to find some other reason to explain his 
dti 2 went back a * Council Chamber. 

“Gentlemen, you still seem to have some doubts. It i 
solutely necessary to clear them up, because our decision 
will be of no value at all unless we are unanimous,” I said 
eae eth eas ae his Aue of view. No one 

. the p sed decision, but he felt tha 
228 resolution signed by all the members of the Counci 
28 tion of my consent, I was showing a lack of con- 
oa: in N ge oo was certain that not one of them 

on his en word, and theref 

wal for their pledge in writing. Kr. 
my. Fre N I said, to hear such words from General 
Guth cide be aia r people! It seems to me that we have 
eiga y side often enough and had opportunity enough 
tht there aT to rove one another’s worth. I will not admit 
For myself T re ghtest suspicion of distrust between us two. 
thes waa br ve no need of written confirmation of the 

any — this Council. But nobody 


wEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


106 , to us in the near futur 
All happen . . 

knows what lt especially, will have to account f OR Ong 

of us, ane the Russian people, and all those Whom 8 
We 

hold deat. av immediately said that he Was Willin 

N ` d nothing. Each went in turn üo the Sgn 

en 


ab}, 
and signed. E 
I was the last to sign. 


f its victories with 
e shared the honour © a s, 0e 
n refuse to drink the cup of humiliation vin 
can Drawing strength from the trust which my co rade s it 
. — place in me, I consent to accept the post of Commander, 
in-Chief. LIEUTENANT-GENERAL BARON P, Wrance, 


March 22, 1920. 


I was signing this, General Dragomiroy was called 
foe lesbo 5 speak to General Denikin, who asked if ki 
been informed of the new political situation and the decision, 
of the Conference of that morning. On being told that I had 
General Denikin announced that he had issued the edig 
appointing me his successor. 

his edict ran as follows:— 


Epicr or THÈ CoMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE ARMED 
Forces OF SourH RUSSIA 


FEODOSSIA. No. 2899. March 22, 1920. 


1. Lieutenant-General Baron Wrangel is hereby appointed 

. of the Armed Forces of South 
ussia, 

2. Sincere greetings to all those who have followed me 

loyally in the terrible Struggle. God save Russia and 


grant victory to the Army | 
LIEur.-GEN. DENIKIN. 
We went into the chamber wh hers of 
the Conference had t where all the members 
Thee that I would ek and General Dragomitov 
throat. T was het and immediately felt a lump rising in m 


“ply moved by the affecting yet cheerful 


NGE OF PO 
THE CHA WER 147 


my comradesin-arms gave me, I felt that 
de ale ' calamities, their shattered hopes, their 
pat P rivations, they turned to me for help and 

ind chat I had for them could only be a fresh 


N 
g7 : 
í . 8 walting 7 7 r * ‘ini è 
Wat wating pur followers who were sacrificing their 
35 


t V. 
er 7 — ~ 2 ~ ry 2 
gene he rm and welfare of their country? What was 


Wos e ruin and shame of their country ? 

x boot, and oe I mastered the emotion which wes tearing 

Lt — and finished my address. 

une behind with Generals Dragomirov and Chatilov, 

I n 2 decided to answer the British Government’s Note 

tot ately. 1 sent for A. A. Neratov, the Chancellor of the 
e Office; but as he was ill, B. A. Tatichtchev came 

el began to di@ate to Chatilov our answer to England. 


vatchtchev soon arrived, and I signed the Note straight 


sy- 
TÈLEGRAM FROM GENERAL WRANGEL TO ADMIRAL 
DE Ropeck AT CONSTANTINOPLE 


SENT FROM SEBASTOPOL MARCH 22~APRIL 4, 1920. 

General Denikin has issued a General Order appointing 
me Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of South Russia, 
snd I have already entered upon my duties. The British 
Government’s categorical demand that we cease fighting 
makes it impossible for my Army to continue, I put upon the 
British Government all the moral responsibility for the conse- 
quences of the decision they have made. I do not admit the 
= tata possibility of direét negotiations with the enemy ; but 
leave the fate of the Army, the Navy, the population of the 
Xcupied territory, and all those who have actually fought on 
8 to the good offices of the British Government. I 
der that those who have deprived the Armies of South 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


140 , rt at the most ctitical m 
— of aas have in the past shown contact? 
though th cause, ate in honour bound to ensure the | 
3 member of the armed forces, of the pe 
ap i occupied regions, of the refugees who wish 10 
a Russia, and of ch = brag ta alo Bolten 

ey the t prso Russia, . 
an ay subordinates to sacrifice their lives for the — ite 
hele country, but 1 cannot ask them to accept an amnesty p of 
the enemy and profit by it, if they consider it dishonon, om 
fore it is — necessary that the British G ote 
t should be prepared to offer a refuge outside Runen 
“ear Chief and his principal colleagues and 1 


will take . the opportunity. It is — 
stood that I give myself above. It ia 


possible, so that work may be put in hand immediately by the 


iations ate completed, in order that the operations con. 
with the cessation of fighting, and the liquidation of the 
administrative, military, and civil organs, may be accomplished 


1 Was Preparing to return to the cruiser General Kornil, 
ded a telegram from General Slachtckov. It 
said that he ht I was in danger in Sebastopol, and asked 
me to authorize him to come over with an armoured cat and 
a detachment of his troops to safe my person. I ordered 
an answer to be sent saying that I no need of a guard, and 
that I considered it superfluous to send an armoured car of 
a detachment of troo » but that I would always be very 
pleased to see General Slachtchor himself. Late that night 
Korni. 


had scarcely come before the unaccustomed sounds of 
the matutinal sweeping of the decks awoke me The chains 


rs crackled, the 
bed, the metal bulkheads echoes ape 


tt I ned, t 
dee rs. 1 could not fall asleep again 


hé * ented by irritating, Worrying thoughts f mind 
— and sat down at a table to write — vz oid 85 


pir orn d only promise them that I wo 


At them to fo 


pen OF THE CoMMANDER-IN-Curer or TRE ARMED 
Os Forces or Sovrn Russa 


SEBASTOPOL. No. 2900, March 22, 1920, 
By Order No. 2899 of March 2znd, General Denikin bas 


inted me his successor. Fully conscious of m k 

15 to my country, I now Sand at the head of the Aemed 

Forces of South Russia. I will do my utmost to extricate the 

Army and Navy from its present dificult situation in an 
wa 


Toll upon al the Joyal sons of Rund to help me wh visi 
entire Strength, so that I may do my duty, Knowing our 
gallant land- and sea-forces as I do, for I have shared their 
triumphs and sufferings, I feel sure that the Army will bar the 
entrances to the Crimea, while the Fleet defends its shores. 
Our success depends on this. Let us set to work and trust 


in God. 
Lreut.-Gen. Baron WRANGEL. 


General Chatilov came on board. He had not any 
tetter than I. He had sat u far into the night with C 
Mhkhrov, the chief-of-staff, familiarizing himself with the 


of our situation, ; 
“eal Denikin had arrived in the Crimea he had applied to 


ra" 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


8 -y, the ex-Minister of Finance, and entruge 
M. V. Ben m ng anew “minister ial cabinet“. Wi him 
with the ta f Bernatzky, who was at Feodossia, and Ner 
gtr; f the department for foreign affairs, who Was i 
the age efs of the civil branches of the administration 3 
all Ar more important colleagues had gone away. A 
rag tee of what remained of the important department, 
the $ > secondary oficials were to be found 5 though they 
aa tanon large Staffs, they had been deprived of their 
a oe and were going 42 dragging round with them 
i cir scattered documents, 

pe emy ies of the administration and the differen 
institutions had been liquidated and disbanded, General 
Denikin had promised four months“ wages to all those who 
had been dismissed, Ss SOON sums had been 

i “evacuation subsidies”, 
Teun Crimea, completely lacking in natural resources, 
had been compelled to board, feed, an subsidize the Army a 
well as the excessively large organizations behind. the. Ines 
month after month. ma 

The inefficient financial policy, General Denikin’s obstinate 
refusal to use the enormous natural wealth of South Russi, 


summarized by its policy of issuin per money, Even these 
issues, —— ser esther, could not supply the demand 
for money, which became more and more pressing as the 
Paper money depreciated. At the time of the retreat from the 
nea, three or four Feen; printers’ offices had been 

) were no longer working, as essential 

parts of their plant had been lost, Those which were still at 
Feodossia could not turn out the requisite quantity of paper 


y had more than one hundred and thousand 


carcely onc-sixtl d be con- 
sidered „ bahnt ‘ oe rest — DE WAGA the sick, 
: L. 8, the Pupils at the im rtant and less 
ohen military Schools, a large number of reservists of 


NGE OF 
THE CHA! POWER 


b of them old men—and the 
PP n is behind dhe. ines len 
pe ioe is devoid of local resources, and in normal 
fee * e expense of fertile Northern Taurida; now, 
. jive 3 ise in its population, and with its economic 
2 his or anized by long yeats of international and civil 
hiner J feed neither its own population nor the Army. 
oni oo earth of bread already in the south coast towns— 
reese wan Yalta, and Feodossia, owing to the difficulties of 
he price of bread was rising higher and higher, and 
got t nccessary fatty substances were lacking. There was no 
pe was not only the feet but also the railway was threatened 


J, ucl. 

ya hack Of Seeks of clothing and munitions had been 
poor in South Russia, and we had nothing with which 
— the Army, which lacked clothing and arms. We had 
of enough rifles, and we lacked machine-guns and 
oat altogether. Nearly all the tanks, armoured cars, and 
male s had been abandoned ot had fallen into the hands 
or enemy. The few that we had been able to keep could 
5 de u for lack of petrol. Our Stock of munitions for 
atts especially for the artillery, would only last for a very 
e. 
no harness for the artillery we had; the cavalry 
tad no horses; the only mounted unit was General Morozov’s 
vend cavalry division, which was a part of General Slach- 
tchov’s Army Coge it had managed to reach the Crimea by 
vad from the north. Except for this contingent, all the troops 
uncenttited in the Crimea had lost the whole of their trans- 
port, The Crimea was poor in horses, and could not supply 

mounts, especially since the field-work season was just 


ganing. 

The troops were completely out of hand, for the confused 
— bad oing on for several months. Drunkenness, 
aid authority, pillaging, and even assassination had 

ume frequent at the centres where the units were 


_Disoluteness had also affeéted the Higher Command, They 
mani in politics, intrigued, and mixed in undignified 
Wal kind atmosphere was highly favourable to adventurers 
The High Can on a petty and a large scale. 
Command of the Don troops also left much to be 


sMEMOTRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL, 

. ai Sidorin, the commander of the A 
desired, Geneth General Keltchevsky, had definitely Pi 3t 
ith the Volunteers, and were lenden ie} parate Coy, 
Polley secking support from the Cossack “democracy™, 

General Slachrchov, formerly omnipotent master gf 
Crimea, had remained at the head of his Army Corps after it 
Headquarters had been transferred to Feodossig. Gener) 
Schilling had been pot at the aoe of the Commander.in. 
Chick General Slachtchov, excellent and energetic officer a 
he was, showed himself well able to cope with his mi 

disparate units. Wath only a handful of men, and in the mids of 
disagter, he had held the Crimea; but his complete in 
ence, the absence of all control, and the impossibility of 

Ef ine called to account for his actions, had turned his head 
He had an unbalanced temperament and a rather weak nature 
and fell an casy prey to the basest flatteries; he was a bad 
judge of men, and, moreover, had an unhealthy taste for drink 
and drugs. He had lost all sense of propriety in the genera 
atmosphere of dissoluteness. No longer content with the rôle 
of military leader, he thrust himself into an influential position 
in gene litics, inundating Headquarters with different 
projects and demands, each more absurd than the last; he 
insisted on the discharge of a whole list of officers, demanding 
that the profession be opened to other more suitable men, 

The interna] administrative machinery was in a State of 
complete decay; it had evolved from a personal dictatorshi 
to a democratic government, which left the Commander-in- 
Chief the direction of only the Armed Forces; thus General 
Pee ees oe per 

recently, 
there had always been an absence of undivided and determines 
on in internal politics. Parallel with the civil administra- 
— e 38 section of the Genetal Staff resided over 
ing to its ideas. Thin A General, formulat a policy accord- 
contradi@ions. Mistake. ication of authority led to inevitable 
sentatives of the — A* D ayir ea 
muddles, and exposed he ority still further accentuated the 
the impotence of the governmental 


ack 


The feeling the T 

to f artar populati 
cha eine Taran dn ne 
every means in their 


THE 
ER 
rts 


Hi * 7 G . 
n wit! thess e 2 oe had 
although 2 OWNS, especi shown 
influence of Soci ne in — 

Socialist ot alarm 

st revoluti 

on- 


fett 
o * 0 — uccced 
. * i suc CÊ "r 
ou . into 
* usd some trouble c new deen the munic 
oe The Genera Staff h the 2 el A alities i 
on OF ihe eho oral la, 
a ve e informed . pott of 
$ i y 
ad been nel by ee de a Strike 
several A with 
n dese 
Nets 


ot ouch , 
gho wer ding themselves 
gst appearances on the ' in the mou ‘ 
grelle and solitary i igh road ntain vill 
asf larget enterprises pre B to Simfe apes. He 
qurety as augn rm id not ackin 
reedy for gmen y reach und E 
eed camp 0 8 8 
that polshevist a to Fosters: fe scrupulou imea 
sends with arm gents were su | Mai-M Captain M adven- 
yot only had ** . rlov'’s and Mel heard 
min, but we als build u eemed difficul r akarov's 
General Chatilo 80 to Tisch everythin t, almost h 
A the Mili sy i Snow ies sec Giai of 
seriou for a lon mmunicatioi ery well, h Makhrov 
T believed K time. He w Departs had been 
Kl poly to ent in the 
Thechanges whi disintegeat of personn plies se: 
as the work w ch were ao could d especially i 
The recent ent on, and voidable had nothin y in these 
— behave w ae rit be mate gradually 
1 leagues ahs the a De Nin c. ys 
‘tn this to o were careful co and m 
chat wi General now worki rrectnes yself 
em and with Gen 8 s toward 
w ideas eral Makhr request th me. ` 
these 8 eno 7 and tell 1 0 have 
Or ng da a ae im of m 
2 the rear unt of m eneral S 
l 1 1 energy, and 
presti as at th gy, and 
importanc ge of the Cor e front. In 
8. One of mmandet n 
my pred — 
SOT S 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGET, 


biggest mistakes had been his gradual dropping ap. 
8 with the troops. I suggested to Chun ke * — dieg 
the post of adjutant, so that he could fill my place at Sek 
during my visits tu the front, ac 

General Makhrov’s report confirmed what Genera] Ch 
had told me. Alo. 

The Strategic situation was as follows; relations }, 
the Balshevists and the Poles had become Seriously — ber 
and the reopening of hostilities on the Polish front could 
expected any day. After the collapse ot General Denikin’s . be 
the Reds had thrown every available unit on tu the Polish . 
except for an inconsiderable number of troops which > 
pursuing the demoralized fragments of the Cossack th 
the Cossacks had lost their fighting spirit, and were melt ; 
towards the Black Sea. 

On the Crimean front, General Slachtchov's UNITS wer 
faced with the 13th Soviet Army’s six thousand bayonet: ao 
three thousand sabres. The enemy were continuing to fortif 
their positions and strengthen them with artillery, tt seemed 2 
if the Red Command’s strategical plan envisaged a Widespread 
offensive on the Polish front and defensive action on ours 

Our troops were holding very vulnerable positions which 
did not lend themselves to an aétive defensive. During the 
summer season, the Sivache would become fordable in its 
middle reaches, and we could easily be circumvented. It was 
8 to advance and seize the mouths of the Salkovo 
and Perekop passes, 

Genera] Makhrov proposed to use the least demoralized 
regiments of the Volunteer Corps for the projected operation. 
He planned to bear down on both the enemy's flanks and 
deliver a frontal attack, whilst troops which were Still to be 
disembarked were to surround the enemy from the reat. 
I suggested to General Makhror that he should elaborate 
every detail of the operation with the commandant of the 
Fleet, and at the same time get into touch with our naval base 
at Constantinople, so that the necessary fuel might be delivered 
immediately, I pave instructions for the planning of our future 
line of defence, and the making of all the calculations necessary 
for the organization of fortifications along it. 

Simultaneously the foundations of the fortifications at the 
northern approaches to Sebastopol were laid; they were to 
Cover the port and our main base. ` 


THE CHANGE OF POWER * 


, aruĝions that the work of listing, classifyin 
lere 71 the abandoned material in the Ctra 5 — 
gent A with immediately and completed speedily, and 
75 de ops and depots should be put in order as 
che Able. I decided to put the work of te-equipping 

ar 3 fe ad the urban population of the Crimea into the same 
de Am 701 der to avoid interdepartmental friction and ensure 
¢ in 900 omical use ot the meagre local resources in the 

he wos pointed General Viltchevsky chief of the 


: Ja 
2 Lamy he had held a similar post in the Caucasian 


Amy, mi 
gad 808 to combine an infinitely large number of military 
We compact formations, reduce the General Staffs, and 
doe the ranks of the regiments with new combatants, 
geist some sort of regular organization to the whole 
ring 1 formulated a scheme for ee the troops to 
my Army Corps—one under General utepov, to be 
sed of the units of the old Volunteer Corps, Korni- 
e Makhiov’s, and Drosdovsky’s divisions, and General 
Slachtchov’s Army Corps, in which the numerous units had 
deen reduced to two infantry divisions—the t3th and the 
zun. The cadres made part of this Corps, and the Don 
Cossack units had been combined with the Don Army 
Corps. The regular cavalry units had been reduced to six 


gaits into 


Although I was preparing to continue the Struggle, I felt 
it was absolutely necessary to safeguard the Army against 
dissfter. I urged General Makhrov to elaborate a plan of 
mation as soon as possible, in co-operation with the 
Commander of the Fleet's General Staff; to decide which 
ports the troops should make for in case of an embarkation; 
iad to take measures for the concentration of the necessary 
tonnage in the ports and the procuring of reserves of coal 
ind oil, So long as the fleet lacked coal and oil, we were in 
* of a catastrophe. 

de provisioning of the Crimea with fuel, as with every- 
thing else, was done from Constantinople, for the resident High 
mea ones, the direé representatives of their Govern- 
iu licies in the Near East and South Russia, were there. 
ele the 70 Chatilov to go at once to Constantinople and 
measures for the provisioning of the Crimea with 


156 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEy 


our military agent there, as well as to discuss 
of a most pressing nature, other 
General Chatilov saw Admiral de Robeck the Bris: 

Commissioner, and General Milne, the comma titish H; 
English Army of Occupation. Chatiloy led the. 75 è 
round to my answer to the Ultimatum, and did his “Sing 
prevent the English from “‘backing out” of their u to 
negotiations with the Bolshevists, and to ensure 5 u the 
as much time as possible. Bainin 

General Slachtchov arrived at Sebastopol, His e 
uniform, his bursts of nervous laughter, and his confuso tic 
abrupt way of talking, created a very bad im 8 an 
expressed my admiration at the way in which he ad We; l 
lished his dificult task of defending the Crimea 1 10 
bim I was sure that the gallantry of his troops would aie 
possible for me to reorganize the Army and put the Sees 
order. Then I told him of the Military Council's deaa 
He replied that he was in full agreement with the decisions ant 
begged me to believe that his troops would do their duty 
He thought there was a possibility of an offensive from the 
enemy within the next few days. In a few words I told him of 
the projected plan for seizing the outlets from the Crimea, 
General Slachtchov then broached general political questions, 
He thought that the Army and the populace should be informed 
of the new Commander-in-Chief’s ideas regarding domestic 
and foreign policy as soon as possible. 

The vacillating policy of the last phase of Denikin’s rule, 
lacking continuity, and undermined hy the intensive propa- 
Ps of hostile groups, had confused and bewildered every- 

dy. Now we had to give clear and definite answers to the 
most searching questions, and snatch away our enemies 
trump cards. Otherwise we could not restore the troops’ lot 
faith in the justice of our cause, nor could we win back the 
confidence of the populace. I could make no answer to him. 

I returned to the cruiser General Kornilov, and that evening 
received a deputation from the clergy and the political groups 

The deputation greeted me very warmly, and exp 
their belief that the Russian flag was now in capable han a 
I thanked them and emphasized the value I set on their mo 
support in such trying times, “You realize our situation, Jon 
know the weight of the burden which has fallen Ae 8 
you have probably heard of the fresh blow our erstwhile Al 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 
19 
ese circumstances it w i 
e dealt us. In th 328 cs 5 would be dishonour- 


| an do is to j 
ibe e you from this dilemma without 3 
* d 


loss of honour,” ] 


old be ely afterwards 1 intetvicwed Cettuin members f 
„tjon separately. They raised nearly all the questi : 
the everyone ad nearest at heart: the peasant CS ram 
together with the agrarian problem, had become z 
ght, question and a powerful plank in the encm) > 
poing J. the acute question of the relations between th 
pr sian Powers and the other new ates which had 
Sout set up on Russian territory, the relations between the 
ee Command and the Cossack Governments, and 
tally the position of the Eagtetn Powers, and particular! the 
‘ility of German support now that the Entente had 
Nenne our cause. All these questions were causing great 
ey to the Army and to society, My answers seemed to 
set with cager approval, and my audience insisted on the 
ees) — circulating pr views amongst as wide a circle 
she ce as possible, | 
8 day I received a visit from representatives of 
de Allied Milt rr my interview with 
General Mangin, chief of the French Mission, I discovered 
shat 2 did pot yet know eee 7588 Ultimatum. 
2sth, a solemn I Diam was followed 
review ot the troops in Nahimov Square. After Mass dad 
been celebrated in the Cathedral, a religious procession, 
beaded by Bishop Benjamin, wound its way to the Nahimov 
Square, accompanied by the Pealing of bells. On the way it 


vas joined by a coming from other churches. The 
— ber: oyed all along Ekateriniskaia Street and 


| the Square. An altar had been set up in front of 
Admiral Nahimov’s monument. By it stood a 3 up of well- 
i people and 3 from the Allied Missions. 
! ws, balconies, and even roofs, were 

nape with onlookers. The — was sunny and calm, the 
hu J Was refleéted in the ill bay as in a mirror. The 
Rt sep out into the silence in wave after wave of sweet 
the i not a flame of one of those innumerable tapers stirred; 
rae floated up from the incense in translucent clouds. 
 teligious service, Bishop Benjamin read the Senate’s 

had arrived the night before, and which enjoined 


Wer 
tag 


the whole population to unite under the new Ch 
-Chict. 

in The Bishop then mounted another step or tu 
“Listen, people of Russia, listen, Russtan soldi 
representatives of our Allies, and listen also — E 
who are hiding in the crowd there!” So began Mer a 
address, and his voice penetrated to the further, 

great Square. He spoke of the cruc! sufferings which C fe 
visited on our country, that if might atone for the a Od hag 
classes of the Russian people; of the gallant de eds as of 10 
who had kept the flag fying during the years of e ee 
disaster, of the path of sorrow which the Russian — 

already been treading for the last few years. Y hag 


This path is a thorny one, and its end has g 
reached. We have just been enduring terrible trials JEt been 
the near future is preparing fresh ones for us. Bur ‘on 
work miracles; those who have faith, those who p 
courageously along the road which conscience ditate vi 
losing their honour, will conquer. A month ago the Ru 
Army was driven back on to the sea at Novorossiisk in 3 
dying condition ; perhaps two months hence it will have taken 
on a neu lease of life, and will go forth and Conquer the 
enemy. 


This speech was delivered with admirable force and 
enthusiasm, and made a profound impression on its hearer: 

After the troops had sprinkled with Holy Water, the 
fegiments were massed in the Square. I, too, mounted the 
steps of Nahimov’s monument and addressed the troops, 
Having in a few words drawn a gloomy picture of our position, 
J said that I had assumed the leadership of the Army without 
hesitation or fear. I trusted in God, who would not let the 


. 


g an 


righteous cause perish, and would give me j t and 
strength enough to — the Army out of this difficult situation. 
I knew the wonderfi of the troops, and I firmly 


believed that they wo d help me to do my duty to our 
country ; I had faith that the bright day of Russia's resurrection 
would yet dawn, 

The troops marched past. Their uniforms were old, and 
moe a mA hi aen in aanre 
worn out pate i d an v 
ground wia fin cied merrily and their heels tapped the 
ground wi à firm tread, They were remembering recent 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 10 


r martyred heroes, and a comforting feeli 
Ache de 15 ol their hearts : "Everything — 
e can Sill bold on” , 

-W owing day T moved from the etuiser Genera! Kornil 
m fo dence which had been prepared for mein the — 
rhe Alled the Little Palace, and was a tiny bungalow with 

x originally built for the High Admiral of the 
bee we had were alee th 
15 jor o separat ter the Mili 
Toe S March zand. General U lagay had rejoined he 
Coup eneral Sidorin had gone to Eupatoria, where the Don 
ae ots were stationed ; General outcpov had gone to 
regi ropol. The reorganization of the Crimean, the Don, and 
Si oluntect Army Corps was well in hand, the equipment 
the Jo. inventoried, and the troops were falling into 
e kind of order. ) 

My General Staff, in concert with the Commander of the 
peet, bad claborated a detailed plan for the projected operation 
hich was to win the Crimean Passes for us, We were only 
gaiting the arrival of assignments of coal from Constantinople 
to faunch the attack. For this operation we intended to use 

Slachtchov’s Army Corps, units from the Volunteer 
Drosdovsky’s men, and Alexeiev’s. When the cam- 
en was Ovet Teens to a gone pet the 2 in the 

west ¢ peninsula, and entrust the defence of the 
wets When to them, whilst the Crimean contingent 
could be concentrated further east, to defend the Salkovo and 
Guenitchesk Passes. Ranged along the railway to defend a 
much-teduced front, it could rest and reorganize quite 


Nei the Governor ‘eh e came om 3 
was very uneasy about rovisioning of the town. 
Bring to se Donini eroe of the railways, the transport 
of corn from the northern agricultural part of the peninsula 
to the coast towns had ceased; the appearance of a large 
tumber of troops and refugees in the Crimea had made the 
question still more acute. There was also a dearth of other 
ary foods—meat, tea, and sugar were lacking. The 
“cessive and disorderly requisitioning by the troops had 
Pag the economie disruption and infuriated the popoi- 
€ i to 
weit W n 


— 


THE CHANGE OF POWPR 


n discussing the shackles of censorshi 
pad ej macher. claiming “treedom of the Press“ 


161 
Pinay 


The uproar had become intolerable. -ayy b-like 


nea 

hings. fors of three of the papers to Sebasto — 
ne aie rea, and expressed my pleasure —— 
den atves of the local Press Which food so close 
ore ment, and whose voice had the ear of the whole 


entlemen, my former activities are known to 1 
k: you know that I have always been the friend of the ig 
attach exceptional importance to the printed word nowadays 
when no section of the country ot of the populace can remain 
outside politics, I respect the opinion of others, and have no 
intention of restricting the freedom of the Press, whatever its 
views may be, provided, of course, that they do not favour 
our enemics. At the same time, I must draw your attention 
to the fact that we are living in exceptional times. We are, 
indeed, living in a besieged fortress; not only does the e 
threaten us on the north, we have also to keep a strict wa 
all along the shore, to prevent him landing his troops; in 
these conditions we cannot dispense with the censor, Even 
in the freest countries a most Strict censorship is always 
imposed at the seat of military operations; how much more 
necessary is it in a besieged fortress! This censorship cannot 
confine itself to purely military questions, because in time of 
war, especially Civil ar, ideas are weapons of war as much 
as guns and rifles, and military and civil censorship cannot be 


ted, 
11 not question your patriotism, gentlemen, and would 
be only too happy to free you from the restrictions which 
ase hindering your work. At the same time I am responsible 
for the cause of which I am the leader, and I have to take 
measures to protect the Army and the populace who are under 
its care against anything which might threaten their safety. I 
suggest that you choose one of two courses: either adhere to 
the present system if I promise you that I will do all I can 
to improve the — and find competent censors; ot, 
abolish the censorship and put all the responsibility on the 
direttors, who will be answerable before the judiciary. In the 
event of the publication of articles or paragraphs prejudicial 
to our cause, they would come under the code of military 
justice, which applies to crimes of a military nature. I ought 
to point out to you that according to war-time regulations, 
Prejudicial to us or fa e to the enemy are liable 


— 


— 


Pa 


= = „ eS eo 


e e ee | 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL me 


evere punishment, even to the death-penalry Thin 
- Think 


réz 
catlemen, and then let me 
E£ know Yous : 


to very s 
over my suggcsuon, 
ans wer. 
he Krymsky Leſluib was the first to ; 
lare thar, taking into consideration . 
s of the moment and all the — : 
he was ready to admit that the zuppt — 
sion af the censorship could not be considered at present, The 
representative of the Yog Rossii endorsed his opinion, 
Burnakin was the only onc to declare that he was teady tg 
assume full responsibility for his paper. After this interview 
the question of the suppression of the censorship was not 
raised again in the Press. r ' 

1 decided to entrut the administration of foreign affairs to 
p. B. Struve, a member of the Academy. Until now the 

sition of director of foreign affairs had been nominally held 


by S. D. Sazonov, who was living in Paris; being so far from 
the struggle, he could not possibly ascertain the facts of the 
new situation and adapt himself to new working conditions, 
He could only resign himself to the faét that the position of 
Russia’s representative had changed, and with great dignity 

and more from action of any kind. His 


he withdrew mege 4 Ms 
presence in Paris me purposeless, especially as it was 
undoubtedly the duty of the . of foreign policy to be 


at the centre of government. 

With the departure of S. D. Sazonov, there was no longer 
any reason for the continued existence of the political delega- 
tion of which he was part, which was n Paris. At the 
head of this delegation was Prince G. E. Lvov, ex- president 
of the Provisional Government, and it included 1 — 
gates men, who sent out protests, memoranda, efc., on different 
problems of our foreign policy, but had no real importance. 
I telegraphed to our ssador in Paris that henceforth all 


communications would take pare only through him. From 


that day on, the political members of the delegation went into 


The direttor of t 
He hastened to dec 
exceptional difficultic 
that I had put forward. 


opposition to the Supreme Command, and took every oppo 

tunity to discredit in foreign circles the cause which we were 

maintaining with such great difficulty. 

R ato ve z9th I promulgated a Statute for the administra- 

eos of che territories occupied by the Armed Forces of South 
ussia; the Regent and Commander-in-Chief was to exercise 


THE CHANGE OF POWER 163 


ivil and military powers, without any limitations 
fullest civi e Cossack territories were to keep their 

De derer. Th r, but the Cossack troops were to be subje& 

at ame ein- Chief. From this time on, the Com- 

ae Commas had full authority over the Cossack 

1 U. joe to the existence of separate regulati 

10 we | : in the same atmy. Sey 0 Stated t 

se oni clearly and openly for the first time. 

‘i 


troops ; 
ons for 
he principle 


CHAPTER II 
PROGRESS 


EARLY 


au I had adopted a series of measures for putti 

Arp in ardet and for reorganization behind the ront, Fh 
not forgotten how necessary it was to provide for an evacu, 
tion in case of misfortune, and J was continually beggin for 
fresh consignments of coal to be sent from Constantinople, 

If we should be forced to leave our native soil, we wou) F 
not be able to count on the sympathy of other countries. 
probably not one of them would offer us a refuge. The Slay 
countries alone, especially Serbia, who owed everything 
Greater Russia, might prove ex ons. I wrote to Prince 
Alexander of Serbia asking for shelter and protection should 
the worst happen. I wrote that I was doing my utmost to Save 
the last shred of my country from Red domination, that I was 
trying to believe that God would help me, but that I had to 
be prepared for the worst. 

t was nearly Easter. How different it was from the same 
season in former years! Spring was at its height and the 


churches were full, but there was not that air of gay 
which is customary on the eve of a festival. Prices were rising 
€; everyone was living 


rapidly, and there was a food-sho 
in fear of a terrible future. On Friday I went to Con- 
fession, and the next day to Communion. After midnight Mass 


in the Cathedral, I had a meal in the officers’ mess of the 
Cossack regiment of the Guard, which was garrisoned at 
Sebastopol: it was one of the reduced regiments which had 
kept 25 old “orp most 20 those who were now command- 
ing Sotnias? co i i 
Cte We mmanded much smaller units during the 
arch 31st a fierce engagement took place in the 
2 area. Ihe Reds had concentrated — three 
: ousand cavalry and had attempted to launch an offensive, 
ut our counter-attack had thrown them back. On April 18 
our right flank detachment, which was to draw off the Red 
reserves, disembarked without incident near the village of 
A Sotnia is a unit of one — Cossacks, —TRansLaTor, 


EARLY 
PROGRESS 
16 5 


girilov forty versts to ti 
gps jt was advancing t * north-east 
jg attacked and E edi 8 of Guenitel 
leerer deren d epi edt terre esk, Bu 
guenitchesk th apron! De g tchesk area, 
„enitchesk tor next da pen the k heavy | k area, 
ons i — Kh 1 — 
godet ! cult conditi ons Th orly. Th usly n uo of 
reo regiments well equi e Reds — landing left flank 
Allen; these had - with rift holdi 28 place 
ol pombarding the onl installed P dk rly with 
5 Nevertheless y canal 5 * Our pieces 
thanks tO the help of * troops dw ich the of 
The following da sailors. overcame ‘ll d into th 
packed . . ear edb pany agen ey ey . 
bridge, which iad be lat General — 
repaired, and our s damaged tured ‘ A ts of 
armoured cars; hen 0 N — The Sivache 
been fortified b th occupied to — Was A 
Perekop zone ageing See supported by 
. April 3rd 1 sup 
da ev 3rd, and ttle was which 
y our sehen Pegs lasted th ees a 
pace asthe paix follo nem aie e da * 
mnt fed ben for they their equi offensive, zei 
N 11 = 
* ee cede gh eee d 
wets dran „and aganache 1 
was with vancing motored wi on. d late 
us, fo on Djimbul with him There I j — 
wit 8 ta jala A 
had ae Bre ried amps me- Beni 
sitar ‘ects h but were from an y me, Our to ppn 
thrown lying low bomba armoured car recs were 
Ne on the plai ur ti . The 
the walked of liqui pa a es. Our = 
are and down the an ' = shel skir- 
omen S eE sae» go l bid 
blessed the ien — for bee £ oe t 
ur der ishers * Bisho 8 * . 
was. himself Genera * i ney 
They at th gouladze cross in hand, 
soon e head of 3 the di 7 
ca Dii the skirmis! visional 
d Djimbuluk Stati and 
tion, which had been 


+66 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


fortified by the Reds, The enemy abandoned 
ninsula in disorder, and retreated, pursued h 
visited our reserve troops and then returned 
Station, motoring to Perekop from there, The nex 
General Angouladze’s command captured Salkoy,, Sword 
Meanwhile our left flank had continued its tation. 8 
tepulsed the enemy’s cavalry attack, broken + eos Vang 
Red front south of Preobrajenka, and rejoined our pee the 
Perekop, bringing with them all the wounded, and the fe at 
they had wrested from the enemy, During the fight (Phies 
Vitkovsky, commander of the left wing units, had Genera 
horses killed under him, and we had taken six bi 
sixty machine-guns, 
The task I had set the troops was a 
repercussions on the orale of the ao were more 
than the yore 8 1 oe attles had sh 
the Army Sill retained its old invincible spirit, and wh; 
was still alive all was not lost, peal wl that 


© Te 
our 


8 guns and 


ccomplished. the 


Polish troops had taken u he 


t 
while ago, — 
uld concenttate 


on the advancing Poles and give us a respite, which we could 


use profitably in many ways. 
e troops were ordered to proceed at once with the 
they had conquered; at the same 
ing fortified lines in the rear. 
On my way back to Se astopol I stopped at Simferopol 
for an hour or so and received several visitors in my carriage, 


with me. He asked that the 
his newspaper, which was entirely sympathetic to the Army. 
He was in a very difficult position in Eupatoria: the General 
Staff of the Don Army Corps would not support his publica- 
tion, for it published its own paper, the Donskoy Vefinik, and 
regarded M. Ratimov’s paper as its rival and opponent, The 
views of the Don paper were frankly hostile to the Supreme 
Command. To support his statements, M. Ratimov presented 
me with a whole seties of copies of the Donskoy Vesinik. 
I ran through them and was absolutely Staggered. I knew 


EARLY PROGRESS 


LL 


jj that this papet Was produced by the commander 


y Corps and his chief-of-taff, Its direéto 
be Don * chief ot the Cossack adron, and 1 had 
count du untavautable reports of him. He had taken part 
8 ET ical disturbances in the Don which had been 
b tes Command. 
g the Fi gaint the Supreme x 
5 here was à spirit of opposition at work amongt the 
That . “she Don Army I knew quite well, but what I now 
Heer 0 Jed all my 4 prehensions. * 
ge Gee ges olf articles in this official paper, inadmissible 
TEE were made to ronse the hostility of the Cossacks 
grt Volunteers, and to excite them against the generals 
gain di gnitarics; the idea of the secession of the Cossack 
ad big irom Russia was also broached, 1 really did not know 
$ ns! . more the utter vileness of the treason of 
which en who were at the head of the Don troops, or the cool- 
their work, open and undisguised as it was. I suggested 
. Ratimov that he should come with me to Sebastopol. 


er! had reccived from M. Ratimov. I suggested that 


bald sce M. Ratimov himself. T left the two of them 
pecher and went into my study. 8 I drew up a 
ul order enjoining Lieutenant-General Si 
us work to General Abramov, dismissing Licutenant-General 
Keltchevsky, the chief-of-staff, and summoning Count du 
Guyla, the editor of the political section and the director 
the paper, before a military tribunal. The police-magistrate 
fer important cases received an order to try this case imme- 
Surely, and to conduct an inquiry so that we might discover 
the names of any others who were also guilty, that they too 
ould be tried. 

After I had drawn up this order I went back to General 
Boaievsky; he was Standing by the window reading a copy 
cf the Donskoy Vefinik. He looked very baffled and sheepish. 
(showed him my general order. 

“Have you anything to add?” 

No—of course not,” muttered the Ataman in strangled 
7 and with a visible effort. ! 

n mediately signed the order and gave it to my aide-de- 
» who saw to its execution. 


inquiry revealed that Generals Sidorin and Keltchevsky 


— f 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


were the ringleaders, A du Chayla had 

not ; he attempted to commit suicide w 
nail , and wooded tinadi verr seriously, Geen he 2 
tried to win the support of the officers of the Dor, ade 
but with no responsc. >. Ming 

I Studied the report of the inquiry and otdered $ 
Keltchevsky, and du Chayla to be indicted before 4 pe 
tribunal, of which General Dragomirov was presiden, ay 
tribunal sentenced the rwo Generals to hard Labour. T The 
muted the sentence to dismissal from the service ing > 
hibition to wear uniform. ad Pro 

As Count du Chayla was in hospital recovering Foams h 
self-infli@ed wounds, his trial was conducted arately his 
did not come up before the tribunal until tick later ‘Th 
tribunal rook into consideration the fact that Couns du Gu i 
was only a common adventurer and 3 minor accomplice, ni 
since I had seen fit to reduce the sentence of the Principal 
offenders, they acquitted him, He went abroad, and continued 
his policy of hostility to the Army even after we had evacuated 
our native territory. 

A vigorous blow had put an end to the machinations of the 
Don Command, and the intriguing and lying of the dissatisfied 

ceased; they felt that they could no longer fish in 

troubled waters with impunity. Most of these pen emen lef 
the Crimea with all speed, and that was that! But General 
Slachtchov could not calm down again. He noticed that | 
carefully avoided discussing with him questions which had no 
connection with his command, so began to bombard me with 
his incoherent dispatches. 

In Simferopol General Koutepoy was keeping order 


amongst his tr with an iron hand; the court-martial was 
ruthless in its sentences, and all n 
executed. Local Liberal clubs, led by M. Oussov, the Mayor of 


Simferopol, were in violent opposition to General Koutepov; 
M. Oussov sent him protests against capital punishment, etc., 
in the name of the whole group. I invited the Mayor to come 
to Sebastopol the next day. The Liberal Press announced his 
departure smik bined tat the . s inviti 
tion to yor foreshadowed er in military 
Serer tion, and that the Supreme evida 
to proceed against certain administrators 
exceeded their authority, 


TT ABZ 


A “ran Case 


Aas 


— 


EARLY PROGRESS 
syor came into my Study wi ' 169 
he vpn a that I neither held Paty an ait of victory, by 
č my hand ry, but 
chen o sit down, he seemed disconcert ed to him nor asked 
b I know all about your disagreeme a 
+ utepovs who is merely carrying out m 5 with General 
po got going to discuss with you oo A raers, ' I told him. 
hich of us two has given orders. I am iS ig the tight, or 
wr. and the people, and I follow the Tiare to the 
ArMeonscience. I am quite sure that sre of my mind 
ar would act quite differently; but as it pe in my place 
És ‘ven me and not you the direction of th appens, destiny 
100 L will do my duty as J sec it. Furthermo: i sstan Cause, 
ing in the accomplishment of my d re I will stop at 
hesitate to cut down anyone who tries nd fs uty, and will not 
beczuse General Koutepov has hanged Op me, You protest 
who were a danger to the Army 5 2 1 SO of men 
chat should the necessity arise I would not hesi - I warn you 
she number by one, md that one would be — * 
The Mayor left my study, obvious] r : 
he newspapers said that the Mayor 1 See The next day 
bast n eropol had come 
back from Sebastopol, but that he refused to OE 
bs interview with the Commander-in-Chief A few, —4 2 of 
ed resigned hie mayoraty. e e Stowell 
Genetal Ulagay had come over to Se ; 
the ii age with him was 8 
commander of the Don Army Corps. All General U i 
atempts to launch an offensive had been so much aes 
tife Nerd me ar wouk not fight any more. Discord was 
8 i 2 Government, the Rada and the 
and Starikov wer a FFF 
the Kuban into th insisting on the transfer of Cossacks from 
a ee e Crimea, but General Bukretov, the Ataman 
[called refused to give his consent. 
Kuban, td conference, consisting of the Atamans of the Don, 
Terek, Generals Ulagay, Starikov, Chatilov, and 
and Te ig the Commander of the Fleet. Generals Ulagay 
Don and 2 repeated their statements. The Atamans of the 
a. supported them, but General Bukretov agai 
t he considered the transfer to be undesira 


and that in his capaci 
p of Ataman he felt that he must consult 
all the Cossacks on the subjed. ‘ied 


— 170 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
¢ thar the 


1 . me it a rms 4 
be allowed to discuss their officers’ orders. 55 
countered with “And I, as their Ataman, nere Bu be 
to be transferred to the Crimea: the Volante allow yr 
always been a stepmother to them. I cannot Ste any re Y ha 
im it. It is not oe — oa Cossacks wil] na, 6510 lor 
omy their superiors, Generals Ulagay, Chk ? iiti 
Babiey, and others who will not fight.” — Nabumenis 
“If that is so, let General Bukretoy command 
himself!" General Ulagay burst out. Į silenced him — Amy, 
to Bukretov. $ and pol 
“You are accusing the superior officers of lact: 
to fight. I have known tony for a long — he Will 
believe you. But your remarks have convinced me hee 
Supreme Command cannot be exercising the the 
authority over the Cossacks in view of the attitude of 
Ataman, the Government, and the Rada. You have — 
that the Cossacks are ready to fight under new officers, I am 
delighted to hear it! Take the Command of the Cauca 
Army yourself and go and fight the Bolsheyigts !” 
“Oh, no, I will not accept the Command myself.” he Cried. 
“Well, then, we have nothing further to iscuss,” I said 
“You refuse to shoulder your responsibilities, and I cannot 
tolerate irresponsible persons inciting the Cossacks against 
the Co Get out, but do not leave the Crimea.” 


Bukretov hurried out. Everyone present seemed 
somewhat confused. Generals Bogaievsky and Vdovenko 
tried to persuade me to revoke my Sechin 

“The Ataman’s person is inviolable,” said General 
Bogaievsky. “You, in co-operation with the Atamans, have 
just promulgated an edi& confirming the autonomous rights 
of the Cossacks; the sequestration of General Bukretov will 
make a very bad impression on them,” General Chatilov also 
tried to persuade me, but I held firmly to my own view. 

“I cannot allow General Bukretoy to go back to the Army 
and continue his da. I do not believe him for # 
moment when be says that the Cossacks rc to fight 

e is reponsible for all that has just I rep 

At last General Chatiloy 5 that he should oe 

General Bukretov’s house and have a private talk with 


. 


PUTTING OUT TO M 


IN THE OPEN STA 


TRANSPORTS IN THE BOSPHORUS 


GENERAL A, P. KOUTEPOV 


EARL 
Y PROGRES 

5 
m 


pali an our | 
j | y ater 
oom 10 General zae Ch 
nn ot U uk , 
— N Í re ee 3 
at d er al, 
grette m ited vac 
our linde e ' to —— 
nderg inan 
tétan d 
din 
8 


o 
the > 
D reyoun the Conf 
eten 
ce. G 
ukret 
ov 


oe * 
am ve lea 
; sed th 
18 take — have 
n self tha he ** 
13 * 
heavy — decisi 
ponsib sion 
lity 


oh gend 
forget Al our mi 
sund 
rftandin 
gs,” 
Id to hi 
im 
m 
y 


1 
15 ot a 
signe the ot di 
ide Aru, det appoint 
Naou ako ni n Gen 
On Apal oth Babicv , and put im Buk 
sministratl¥ 18 his di eneral retov 
ied m0 c official ov isposal sU com 
re io 8. I Wer sau. laga man 
. of the admi at the being & Counci ouro 
iganti ni m bo iJ 
antic task istrati en at ene i cil af : 
civil and which on Ww the h in U the chi 
Ii its fundam economi destin ere not — on me chief 
a pa ag hac life of 7. pause * diferem 
k all the ae to be 8 of de fe 
no accu Pale and recreated, not Lara The 
greatest torra =o and the and not 2 
adapeabili strati y men econ est sen merely cd, 
momen ty cou ve expe with omi se of y rec 
t. and i Id ha rien the ical condi the on- 
e . e b. fth word 
8 heir The icult t with uite un owled ve 
Sines b e experien oem paca 
er . the aay es ere retro of the 
the isn . ‘ot all sos nit oe 
negati il War sa bem a okrasa apera er 
they ve ie It was i ry, which they ee, and 5 of 
did not geristi . was had Stab They rom 
It pened ey were cated iat the . da y * 
val, nd Was * » as are al ons wi needs work; 
E55 “ea a boty l e of the 
able ikin was b sity i Creati uctaci inevita M 
to ha cyo ty in tiv es ble 
cope d Naam er — work 15 and set 
with fl p of f inventing 
their work Liberal But the olutionaty 
ck than cs circles colleagues 
3 er 
en 
They 


= 172 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
for the most part men of words and 

ho showed . ation 

VES to be 


Intelligentzia w 


were 
members of the o. 
incapable of action even 1 the political battlefield. They 
incapable of any creative work, for they had neither th wen 

e nor the bureaucratic experience. City 


Tala clearly that under the ab 
ized quite clearly that under the a notmally 4 
conditions which then prevailed, only a Statesman iy differi 
mon ability could cope with the gigantic task awaiting cl w 
the Crimea, I was convinced that the only man preat cn. 9 
for the task was M. A. V. Krivochein. enougt 


I had known him personally for a long time. Al) Rus 
recognized his fatesmanlike work years ago. He Ussia 
masterful character and an extraordinary capacity for bad 4 
and during his long career had studied the mos Ph 
branches of the administration. He had served in the Mj aa 
of the Interior in the which dealt with tos ane 
of the Zemstvos, and there had gained a knowledge we 
peasant question. He had been in the State Agrarian Bank, the 
was ex-chief of the Emigration Departmen and 

Ministry of Finance. In 
impetus to the activities of the Peasant Bank, and had put it 
to creating small peasant peoprictors, For six years 


ged to the older school 
not one of tho 0 

of those who were ready to throw in their lot 
necessity of 


the Revolution, 
reck E at he cl realized 
oning with it. He kaew how to ar Kiowelf to the der 


BARLY PROGRESS 
3 


work which required continual chan 
on“ $ i conventional routine. r 
0 admit 0 what enormous sacrifices M. Krivochein would 
uke he consented to share my heavy load with me, 
to ing him. I bo ed that he would consent; an ardent 
wa 3 ja man with 2 sense of duty would make this 
et for his country. : : j 
2 11. K ptliarevsky left for Patis on April gth, taking my 
. N Kriv ci. J 
jase oe progress of the new régime did something to 
the population, for energetic steps had been taken 
i pish Order in the interior, and there had been a 
10 front — But . situation was still 
Wonen Enemy propagan a was having its effect. In the 
men . ad 5 representatives of the civil and 
ae powers and with politicians, I noticed that each one 
aed pronouncements from the new rulers on all the 
oF ig questions of the day: the agrarian question, our 
options wich the Cossacks, the ncw States on Russian 
rerritory, and Western Europe. Admiral MacCully, the chief 
of the Avcesican Mission, who was v well disposed towards 
us, and also General Mangin, chief of the French Mission, both 
pointed out to me the nocni for making my opinions 
public, in order to guard against ¢ suggestive rumours which 
were being circulated in foreign circles about the change of 


. 


ver. 

f bowed to public opinion, invited Press representatives to 
all on me, and expressed the following vicws to them on 
the problems of the moment :— 


After six days of hard fighting, we have taken the Crimean 
Passes and have entrenched our position. 
The Army is being reorganized with all speed, and is fallin 
sites Army is b eier deln fir the ordeals it bas erf 
In the very near future I am goin to introduce a whole series 
of organization-measures which eliminate some of the 
defofls which make the administration of the Army so difficult. 
A series of measures for raising the moral tone Of the n. 
we already been put into force. Tribunals of honour wi 
wide powers have been set up for the officers in the units; they 
eur ven degrade su . Ssa 
eee with the above measures, we will attempt 
the most urgent questions afſecting national life. 


174 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEI 


Three years of anarchy combined wi 
of Government have complicated Seine frequen, F 
and economic life, and they cannot be settled ot nden Bey 
each new Government adopted a programm ed One pty 
the sympathies of the population by sedu Bix: likely to 02 lo 
nobody could possibly fulfil. e Promise, 

The agrarian question is a case in poi 
to settle the most vital questions, . = me andere 
bounds of possibility. emain Within ne 

The essential task before the authorities is th , ; 
rule of law for the people of that part of South, K. cation of 
is occupied by my troops, so that they can a ussia wh; k 
their promises in the most comprehensive way, ently fulgi 

I am preparing measures which will enable the work 
the land to obtain as large a plot of ground as p 5S0 
individual ownership, The future of Russian agricult ber in 
Re 2 peasant proprietor; big landed estates dere he 

The improvement of the material welfare 
and the satisfaction of their industrial needs 7 the worker 

“tah of our 
principal cares. 

Let us now turn to the causes of our failure; they are man 
They can be summed up by saying that strategy was sacrificed 
to a policy, and, what is more, to a worthless policy. 

Instead of uniting all the forces fighting Bolshevist Com. 
munism and evolving one policy for them Russian 
policy free from party spirit, a partisan “Voluntarist” 
policy was adopted, whose directors were the enemies of 
Russia in everything that did not bear the mark of 
“Voluntarism”. 

They fought the Bolshevists, it is true; they also fought the 
Ukrainians, the Georgians, and the Azerbeidjanians ; it needed 
very little to set them fighting the Cossacks, who made up 
half our Army, and who had declared their indissoluble union 
with the regular troops by the blood they had shed on the 
field of honour. In short, having proclaimed the principle of 
Greater Russia, One and Indivisible, they proceeded to disrupt 
all the Russian anti-Bolshevist forces and to divide Russia up 
into a chaos of impromptu States fighting one against the 2 

I visualize quite another way of resurrection for Russia. 4 
few days ago I signed an agreement with representatives * 
all the Cossack troops, defining the conditions which ope 
govern our relations with one another. The Cossack States od 
to keep their autonomy in internal affairs, but their arm 
forces are to be subordinate to us on certain conditions. 


BARLY PROGRESS 15 
* Cossack States, | have assumed full 
onde + and military power. In questions af n 
acd oY rely largely on the co-operation of public opinion, 
må ‘ qithin a besieged fortress, and oc t trong and 
* ger can save the situation. The pesma Necesaity is 
gored pring the enemy ; we have no time tor party warfare, 
ihe à of Bolshevism, which threatens us all, is 
wisdom will find a political formula which will 
n classes of the population; but until the Rruggle is 
yn cs must be as one, and do the necessary work 
gtt 2 partisan spirit, The Strictly simplified adminis- 
en chinery that I am setting up contains no party chen 
“workers, I tecogmize neither monarchists nor republicans, 
oal nly clever men and hard workers, 
1 hol d the same opinion on the question of “orientations”, 
e agreements with whoever you like; but my watchword 
a Russia 1 * 
* hope ibe German “orientation” of which people hare been 
eciting and talking for the last few weeks, I cannot take it 
seriously. Germany is exhausted after the War, and absorbed in 
her home affairs; it ts obvious that she cannot give effective 
a to any other country. 
tis not by a triumphal march from the Crimea to Moscow 
Unt Russia can be freed, but by the creation, on no matter 
bow small a fragment of Russian soil, of such a Government 
with such conditions of life that the Russian people now 
groaning under the Red yoke will inevitably subnut to its 
Attractions. 


On April 11th I appointed a Commission to study the 
agrarian question; its president was Senator Glinka, the 
ex-director of the Emigration Bureau, and one of A. V. 
Krivochein’s most intimate colleagues. 

I realized that the agrarian question could not be settled 
sutisfaftorily if it were treated as one problem; for Russia is 
s0 immense, and its ethnographical and economic variations 
0 many; moreover, dissolution and anarchy had ruined the 
cconomic life of the country and falsified all legal relations. 
— decision would provoke much discontent, and we would 
Ba to correct our errors later, in the light of experience. 
oe conditions of life forbade us to delay any longer 
ned ce den knot had to be cut. The question had to be 

for an important psychological reason: we had to tear 
‘semy’s principal weapon of propaganda from him, 


170 
die tlie imagination of the Army and the popula 
— impression on foreign opimon. Ce, and may, 
I set foot in the Crimea I pan 


he first momen" -sablish the bare cl 
- ecessary it was to re-om ish the re cicments leq 
whee h ideas had been badly shaken durin 
the 


justice, tor 
r Civil War. 
of a Strong, legal government and 
rit was one of the principal causes o pe å 
dissolution ol General Denikin's Army. The troops the 
hecome demoralized; the supreme military jurisdiction un d 
the Attorney-General for the Army and Navy was powerle, 
One of the Co n-Chief" 5 edicts gave the immedi 
superior of an ofender the right to institute criminal — 
ceedings against him and try him. The Army Corps tribunal 
com of co t jurists, were almost at a standsill; 
quite half the to number of cases were never heard at al 
jal, which were soaa dependent 


on 

active dispensers of justice, and composed as they were of m 
who for he most part Jacked the most rudimentary kii 
J of the law, they often committed the grossest errors 
which were irreparable, and which undermined the very 
foundations of the idea of justice and legality. Thus the good 
name of Justice was compromised. 

My order of oon, 6th decreed that henceforth judicial 
proceedings shoul not on the goodwill of the 
reg authoritics, but on the attorney, who was to present 
the indictment to a competent tribunal, at the same time 
informing the accused’s immediate superior, so that he could 
issue the necessary order, eK 

Parallel to other measures for the stamping out of pillaging 
and brigandage, an order of April rath set up special com- 
missions with military jurisdiction for the commanders of 
garrisons and fortresses, and later on for the general staffs 
of Army Corps, divisions, and isolated 8 

ing of a president and five members, 
were sclected as far as possible from men who had 
had to be one of these 


EARLY PROGRESS 


cal limits of each Commission's a i 

mes een of the district, or alteenatively feo come 
De of cimes committed by any member of 1 particular 
gan" formarion. A little later, the bettet to uatanter the 
qué ‘eof the civil population, tepresentatives of the peasants 
men g put on the commissions. Every yolos (district) was 
ed to two representatives with deliberative powers and 
güd pt to be present at judicial inquiries; the chief commis- 
che riß dto record in a special procès-verbal all the Opinions 
: d by the representatives of the volost, and act on 
op if they were nat contrary to the law and could be 
tem e without prejudice to the inquiry, 

ted 

ore tal was conducted by one of the members of the 

“emission, who had the powers of a eee mapistrate, 
Ar was not bound to observe all the formalities that the lay 
ar rovided for judicial proceedings of earlier days, 

h 155 true that this arrangement led to a certain amount of 
confusion. between the functions of the attorney and the 
` Joe, but this was inevitable owing to the conditions under 
which the commissions worked: they had to have full powers 
andi dence to ensure quick and decisive action. Never- 
theless, — member of the commission who had condutted 
the examination did not have a voice in the final verdict. 
As for procedure, the special commissions had to adopt the 

on which the courts-martial worked. The verdicts had 
to be ratified by competent military chiefs; if these did not 

with the — * the case passed to the Army Corps 
tribunal, or to that of the military district. 

Throughout the whole period of the struggle in the Crimea, 
these commissions with military jurisdiction rendered invalu- 
able services to the Government in its campaign against the 
vatious abuses which were corrupting the Army. Pillaging by 
the troops ceased almost entirely. Besides the testimonial of 
numerous impartial witnesses, | also received a whole series 
of resolutions adopted by village assemblies, thanking me for 
having set up these commissions which had delivered the 
People from extortion and pillaging; these bore witness to the 
utility of the commissions better than any words of mine 
du do. Even the section of the Crimean Press which had 


the commissions at first finall recognized their 
usefulness y 


t77 


Other edits excluded cases against minors between the 
N 


178 


ages of ten an 
martial, and 

prevailing callo 
intimidate ; they merely 
apathy. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


d seventeen from the competence of the co 
rohibited public executions. In view of ae 
usness, public executions no longer served 

aggravated the existing State of eh. 


cal position was &ill uncertain. On April Sth- 


li i . 
roth Admiral Seymour sent me the following Note: 


e Admiralty begs to inform you that on Satur 
Av ryth, Lord r zent a telegram to M. Chicherin aun. 
that although the Armed Forces of South Russia haye 
defeated, they cannot be allowed to go on to disaster, and 
thar should M. Chicherin not reply without delay that he isa, 
least ready to accept Lord Curzon’s mediation and zuspend 
all further offensive action in the south, His Majesty's Govern. 
ment will be obliged to order His ay aike Fleet to take all 
necessary &eps for the protection of the Crimean Army and the 
tevention of the invasion of their place of retreat by the 


Soviet forces. 


At the same time General Mangin, chief of the French 
Mission, wrote to Struve: 


As a result of our conversation of to-day, I have the honour 
to enclose an extract from the telegram from the Minister of 
Marine of the French Republic, which J have already sent to 
General Baron Wrangel:— 

“The French Government will act in concert with the 
British Government in supporting General Wrangel with 
material help, so that he will not be forced to makean armistice 
with the Soviet on their conditions, but will be in a position to 
make à proper treaty on behalf of his Army.” 


On April 11-24th Neratov, our diplomatic representative 
at Constantinople, telegraphed :— 


According to a Bolshevist radiogram, Curzon has sent an 
ultimatum to Moscow; an armistice is to be signed with the 
Volunteer Army, and if hostilities continue, he threatens 
intervention by the English Fleet. Chicherin has agreed to 
begin peace negotiations immediately. 


But five days later, General Per , Head of the English 


On, sent me the following Note: 


EARLY PROGRESS 
179 


partist Mitrrant Mission’s HEADQUARTERS 


SEBASTOPOL, 
April 29, 1920. 
„en EXCELENT 6 as 
yor General Milne, Commander-in-Chief of the Black Ses 
me to communicate to you the followi 
Am}: a Lord Curzon to Admiral de Robeck, High 
Commission i 
me a answers that we have received from M. Chicherin in 
ference tO our attempts to make terms for General Wrangel’s 
Crimean Forces haye not been encouraging up to now. In- 
arad of Stating the Soviet's conditions, as we asked him to do, 
Chicherin js trying to obtain further political concessions which 
we cannot grant him. Therefore we are powerless for the 
tto obtain what General Wrangel demands. Should we 
de unable to make terms for him, as seems probable, the only 
Atetrative is for bim to do what he cin for himself. Should 
General Wrangel prolong the Struggle, it can have only one 
result, and we cannot encourage it by subsidies in money or 
kind.” 
BatGADIER-GENERAL PERCY, 
Chief of the British Military Mission. 
To Hrs ExcELLENCY THE ComMMANDER-IN-CHIBF 
OF THE ARWED Forces or Sourr Russia. 


In the meantime, negotiations between the Poles and the 
Rolshevists had been broken off, and the Polish troops had 
unched an offensive and thrust back the Reds all along the 
front; therefore they hastily concentrated all their forces on 
the western front, The fall of the Crimea would leave the Red 
Command free to concentrate all their efforts against the 
Poles. France, who invariably supported Poland, had naturally 
realized this; therefore the French Government would not 
sympathize with the new English policy. On my initiative, 
e telegraphed to our Ambassador in Paris, V. A, Makla- 
kov, and asked him to sound the French Government as to 
t intentions, 
Maklakoy telegraphed on April 18th-May 18t:— 


French Government hosdile to Entente with Bolshevists; will 
not use any pressure to secure capitulation of Crimea. Will 
not participate in any mediation aiming at this, even if others 

it. Sympathizes with idea of defending Crimea and 


180 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL s 


the Tauric Province. French Government consi 

to be Russia’s principal enemy, and therefore t Bolshey: 
Polish offensive, Will not countenance idea or mpathizes 10 
annexation of the Dnieper area. If a Ukrainian G 5 ulag 
set up, will only recognize it de falfo. Overname f 


I answered the British Government’s Not 
by a letter to General Percy on April 16th-May ae l 16a 


On April znd the British Government invited 
Denikin to end the Civil War, warning him that if h Jener 
comply they would withdraw their support from thy did 
Forces of South Russia. € “Armed 

I had become Commander-in-Chief by then, so Ii 
British Government that since I had os ok ported the 
their demand, I surrendered the Army, the Navy 8 * 
population of South Russia to the good offices of His Bri the 
Majesty’s Government. I believed we could trust hen Ce 
plicitly to regard it as a question of honour to save all — 
who did not wish to accept the enemy's mercy. I indicat ed 
at the same time that it was absolutely impossible for us to 
negotiate directly with the enemy. 

Lord Curzon’s communication to M. Chicherin, which 
Admiral Seymour sent on to me, contains an explicit declara- 
tion that should the Soviet Government refuse to accept 
English mediation, of should there be a fresh offensive on 


the southern front, the British Government will order its ships 
d avert a Soviet invasion of the refuge 


to protect my Army an 
which the Armed Forces of South Russia have found in the 
Crimea. 

u communicated to me the 


In your letter of April 29th yo 
gist of Lord Curzon’s message to the British High Commis- 
Soner at Constantinople. It seems that M. Chicherin has 
brought forward certain political claims which are unacceptable, 
and that therefore the British Government has decided that 
the only possible course still open is for me to try and obtain 
for myself the conditions I want from the Soviet Government. 

T cannot believe that the British Government now inter 
to renounce the rôle of mediator which it assumed on learning 
that I could not possibly enter into direct negotiations w! 


enemy. : 
I aii the difficulties of the situation in which the Kuban 
troops now find themselves, isolated as they are 12 = 
shores of the Caucasian, and I have authorized Ataman On the 
Bukretov to negotiate for himself, releasing him n 
obligation which binds him in his capacity of Ataman to 


EARLY PROGRESS 1 
g * ; 

grate negotiation ot arrangement. Gen 
rs n negotiations with the ö 
force anfavourable conditions, has asked me to-day * 
sily rt enough for at least ten thousand mien, so that he 
him in 2 position to transfer those who refuse to yield to 
* soviet power to the Crimea. I am arranging to do as he asks 
the is incident is one more proof that neither nor 
ge of any kind will bring peace to Bolshevist Russia if 


s car in which forty thousand Cossacks took part, and 
ahes — headed exclusively by non-commissioned * — 
except for just one Cossack officer of higher rank, and the 
rising which has just begun in Eisk and Timochevka on terri- 
cory recently occupied by the Bolshevists, just at the moment 

the Ataman and the Kuban Government are opening 
tiations, are also witnesses. 

The sole method of saving Russia from 8 anarchy 
is to preserve a healthy nucleus around which all the move- 
ments which have broken away from the tyranny of Bol- 
chevism by brute force can group themselves. Russia cannot 
be saved from the danger which threatens to engulf her and all 
Europe by another march on Moscow, but by the union of all 
the popular anti-Communist forces. Hence the integrity of the 
territory occupied by the Armed Forces of South Russia, as 
well as of the Cossack territories, is a fundamental necessity 
if we are to attain the goal that the Allies have set up—the goal 
that is really incumbent upon the whole civilized world, ie. 

ending of the Civil War and of Russian anarchy. 

To facilitate the British Government’s negotiations with the 
Soviet, I propose to send special delegates to London—men 
who understand the present situation in my territories and the 
Cossack States, and who know my intentions. 

Finally, I think I ought to point out to the British Govern- 
ment, as well as to all the Powers of the Entente, the danger 
which they themselves run from the situation they have created 
by their decision to deprive me and my Army of all support 
at this critical moment. This decision was not made as a result 
of any ation of mine. Their action is equivalent to a victory for 
the Soviet Powers and a capitulation to Communism, and it 
will of necessity influence the feelings of the Russian people 
har — not compromise with the Soviets, towards the Allies 


Will you be ood it this to His Britannic 
2 good enough to trans mit this to 11 
Majesty’s Government. . 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGPL 


id-April, the Bolsheviks resumed the ofen.: 
8 Sotehy. General Morozov, Ps, 10 
rundet of the Kubanian Army, and 2 member, Pa 
Rada began to negotiate with the Bolshevists with oth 

* . ; 
i dun n I ordered all our available t ‘ 
be sent to the port of Adler, and zent an urgent petitis. to 
Admiral de Robeck for the co-operation of the English Re 
General Chkouro was put leaving for Adler 100, so i oni 
him with the task of commanding those troops which shouts 
refuse to negotiate with the Bo ts and of transferi 


of rawing-boats, under the most difficult conditions ; the 
were — ro Russian transport-ships and English oÈ 
wat, Horses, big guns, and machine-guns had to be abandoned 

> a ter the 
evacuation of Novorossiisk, This time I ordered the Kubani N 
Cossacks to be embarked first. General Bukretov and M Otozere 
and members of the Kubanian Government and Rada 
persuaded officers and Cossacks thar the Crimea was am 
ambush, and that within a few days all the units of the Army 
there would be forced to capitulate, 

The embarkation was finished on April 19th, and the shi 
sailed for the Crimea, Many of the Kubanian Cossacks 
capitulate; 2 smal) minority took refuge in the mountains, and 
the rest embarked, as the majority of the Don regiments and the 
9 = of Terek and A Cossacks had done. 

eneral 


Bukretoy — signed his Atamanship, givi 


ata 


up his insignia to the President 
ance with the laws of the constitution. The President, the 
engineer — heap e oo, He was followed by the 
members o Rada, 

the gional funds with dem. niai 

April 21st t who had been evacuated from the 
Caucasian coag reached Feodossia, I went Over there the next 
wide rerea deb ments and chat with the officers. Mot of 

officers were i 

had foughe m yd old comrades-in-arms who 


Northern Ca before 
Tsaritsin, er the mogt tenacious fighters had! bebe aed to 
“ee Tepes tir faith or their courage 


i On the coasts of Caneae: had 
PMS arrived was fiions at the treason of — — 


EARLY PROGRESS 
tig 


get member a pe Rada. I felt sure that th 
‘, purged of traitors and cowards jot aner: 
„grati 9 afiuence of demagogucs in the ot ee the 
seh iC othects, an rested and Te-Cquipped — * trusting 
94 could once more become those admirabl ith all they 
* fought the enemy $0 gtimly in Northern ¢ Mies et in 
* “ia a on 


er regiments were sent fo Pupatoria ery iiie : 
poa Army Corps. The Kubanian units w a with 
the divisio and the Terck apd Astrakhan | reduced * 
oF to it. I put gallant General Babiev at its a — 
— of ei most brilliant cavalry generals in 
sath Russia. He biog rave and exceptionally high-spirired 
ood ba a rare instinct tor commanding cavalry. He was r. 
elf 2 first-class 8 di gute, to use the Caucasian term 
was adored by the officers and Cossacks. He had alway x 
victotious whether be was commanding a 
division. His cavalry ch Sate that 
, brigade, OF 3 alry charges always threw the 
5 ranks into confusion. During the Great War and the 
Civil War General Babicv, who was Always to be found in 
the mos dangerous places, had been wounded nineteen times. 
His right arm was shorter than the other, but in spite of all 
his wounds he had kept his irrepressible spirits. An ardent 
Russian patriot, he was highly indignant at the anti-national 
imrigucs of the Cossack Separatists. I could set my mind at 
ex apout the units he was commanding. 
Some days before my journey to Feodossia I had inspetted 
the regiments of the Don Army Corps at Eupatoria. General 
Abramov was now at their head; he was an extremely brave 
man and incorruptibly honest, à very resolute leader, and ən 
exceptionally tactful one. By birth he was a Don Cossack, by 
education a staff-officer. Before the Revolution he had com- 
minded a division of regiments-of-the-line, and for a long time 
tad been quartermaster-general to one of the armies. He 
-the-Guard in South 


also commanded a hagide ot Cossacks-ot 
he edly held in high esteem. Now at 
= head of an Army Corps, he was rooting o all the germs 
disorder with a firm hand. He had ischarged quite a 
mmber of superior officers and im roved the morale O 
officers and Cossacks, I had no doubt that in a very short time 
rder and make it fit 


ie 
Maabiew was 


=a IRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


here the units of the Crimean and olunteer A 
were aiioa The regrouping which I had initiated Com, 
carried out. The Crimean Army Corps was arranged in bern 
along the railway in the Salkovo district; the Volunt — 


below Perekop. The students f tte 

military schools who bad fought in the ranks fon the 

Slachtchov’s troops had been separated out, and it was med 
ible for these young men, some of them stili 


eam ooann 


Fortifications were going forward rapidly, trenches - 
being dug, machine-gun emplacements constructed. 2 
barbed-wire entanglements put up. Behind the lines Similay 
work was being done just as actively, and strategical railroad; 
were being constructed with feverish haste. 

Discipline was much better, especially in the big towns, 
I insisted relentlessly that all the garrison officers should take 
the most energetic measures to put down disorders and 
slackness amongst the soldiers behind-the-lines ; I gave orders 
that all those who were fit to fight were not to leave their 
units without real justification, and that all the wounded whg 


„% ee ee 


had quite recovered were to leave hospital and return to the 
— immediately, I also insisted on the observation of the 
con 


orm. 
On April 28th I issued an edict the name of the 

Volunteer Army to that of the 1 The Army 
rr sack troops 
by the name of the distrié from which came, 

The name “Volunteer” had been extended from the Army 
to include the policy of those who directed it. It no longer 
meant certain military units; it had become the common name 
. wich General Denikin had been 

, “Volunteeri®” policy, Press, and Powers 
become current terms, 

Glorious though it had been in the past, associated as it was 
with the early progress and heroic Struggles of Generals 
asi and ov, the term “Volunteerism”, which had 
1 So dear to all participants in the gtru e, had with time 
re its old attraction. It had been discredited in public opinion 

even in the Army because of the policy of General Denikin 


= 


EARLY PROGRESS 


157 
colleagues, the contempti i 

pis dos ts which had infested yt perp tee 
A cements ee ctuntecti&” High Cam and mw. 
perween the “Voluntecrist” High Command and the 
Of the two armics fighting in Russia, the right to 
“The Russian Army belonged to the one com- 

ge wat men who had remained loyal to the national fa 
Hel of Meeething for the welfare and honour of thet 
bc viously the name Russian Army” could not be 
“a 1r00PS whose leaders had replaced the Russian 
with the Red flag, and the very name of Russia with 


rame Internatio 
ig true that there were also many honest Russians in the 
of the Red Army, which was not as it had been two 
‘ously. Daring the je in Northern Caucasia 
e | peyis s had consis of all the shady characters 
in the eddy the Revolution had thrown up from the 
— social Strata. They were the very worst elements which 
W malized and disintegrated the Russian Army. Such a 
ao mercy. But in the later stages of the Struggle 
ers had been forced to use conscription; after cate 
gements were to be found in both armies; their presence 
sone of the other depended largely on chance geographical 


cigcumstances. 
My predecessor had not eran 7 — this factor. His 
parrow and uncompromisin persecuted not onl 

I those whose ideas differed Foca te own, but also — 
eho had dealings of any kind with hostile organizations, or 
even with organizations not sufficiently favourable to the 
colunteer cause, He had hunted down not only those who 
hid been in touch with the Balshevists in some way or another, 
perhaps against their will, but also anyone who had been 
conne&ed with the Ukraine, the Geo ian Republic, and so on. 
This insane and cruel policy provo ed a reaction, alienated 


oo 


momed as as their liberators came maces Oot 

fall a prey to our suspicion, and to languish under inter- 
mnie inquiries, The same relations had been established 
E the civil population in the y occupied territories. 
veryone became suspeét, were their crime no greater than 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


sold to the Reds, of their own free wil 
or the conveyance of food, or of hayi l, men. 
a post as clerk in a food co-operative centre or a ren Mtei 
bureau because they were dying of hunger. “Stang 

By an edict of April 65 I freed all the officers ang whe 
who had given themselves up and come over to ou den 
before or during the Struggle, from every kind of proca, de 
and service-restridtion, as well as all those who E coding 
previously in the Soviet Army, and who had, therefore. re 
undergone unishment and service-restridtions afer i 
territory had. been occupied by the Armed Forces of the 
Russia of their own free will; they were all reinstated in 
ranks and privileges they had held on December 1, 1915, At the 
same time, all the officers and soldiers who had served the — 
States, Ukraine and Georgia, and who had undergone punish 
ment and restrictions on that account, were exempt Aa al 
further puni or service-restrictions, 

an edict of June 8th these concessions were also 
to the Rafts of institutions and the civil administration. 
At the end of May, I addressed the following appeal to 


the officers of the Red Army :— 


Officers of the Red Army! I, General Wrangel, have taken 
over the command of the remains of the Russian Army. Not 
Red—but Russian! The Army which, not long was dill 
powerful and terrible to its enemies, and in the ranks of which 


ö always served their 

us ian ve ys ir country loyal) 
aad courageously; they have died that she might be happy. 
They are part of one united family. Three years ago the Russian 
Army forgot its duty and opened the gates to the enemy, and 
c 


Now our Mother Russia lies before us—ruined, dishonoured, 
and covered with the blood of fratricidal warfare. . . . 

For three terrible years those officers who remained loyal to 
their sacred traditions have been treading the path to Calvary 
to save the honour and welfare of the country whose own 
sons have brought shame upon her. These blind, unconscious 
sons were under your command, one-time officers of the invin- 

t you to follow this shameful course? What & 
it that has brought you to raise our hand against your old 
comrades-in-arms, your regimental colleagues? 


156 
thar of havin 
of transport 


GARLY PROGRESS 


ce cn to many of your number * 
2 Ar of their own free will, They al! r left 
eB unger, and fear for the future impelled them + oral 
AT scoundrels. Few men are capable of 2 
whe — gelf-abnegation. . . . Many of these * — a tre 
a tom of their hearts they feel that they have fallen 4 
e dot theis feat of reprisals prevents them from coming yea 
to us i 
de to think that amongst you Red officers 

cnet men in whose hearts love of country S nt te 

j call u you to join us, so that you may atone for your 
jame and once more join the ranks of the —.— Army 
de true Russian Army. | 
i, Wrangel, Commander-in-Chief at this moment 
we you the word of an old officer who has given the bet 
E of bis life to his country, that I will forget the pad and 
give yoo ar e y prama to atone for your errors. 

Regent ai Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of 
South Russia. 


ih 


GN WrANGeL. 


| ordered this proclamation to be distributed as widely as 
posible, amongst the enemy ; it was conveyed across the 
frontier bront agents, and dropped from aeroplanes as though 
were a 

The difnculties of the agents of the military and civil 
siminifration worried me very much, The ever-increasing 
wê of living caused them much suffering, especially if they 
had families, I issued successive orders increasing their rations 
wd providing help for the families of those who had died or 
ben taken prisoner or abandoned during the evacuation of 
Odessa and Novorossiisk, 

Simultaneously I began to reduce the staff of officials which 
FCC 
os revenue, and raise the Customs duties and 

taxes. 


But the rouble still continued to fall. The little territory 


È MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEY. 
U 


id&t profited from this at once, and for some 
2 — — 5 8 a been noticeable 3 tee 
he ſactory hands of Sebastopol ; they were organizi : 

1 “ihis matetialized, we would be in a dreadful © a Sty 


Except for the Cossack Regiment-of-the-Guar 
no tr at in Sebastopol, I decided to s a, 1 were 
AN for their delegates and had a ong intervica 
them. I told them that since April 9th the Ditectors C. . 


the labourets wages 
officials, In future, workmen S wages were to he raised When. 
in th 


y wages. To 
to be with, two such shops were 
workmen of the hope Po’. And finally, I informed the 
ess State of our 
of and and the inade- 
i expressed my belief that 


the workmen uing their ; 
The strike d; me : ; 
met With no ou take place, 1 —— satisfied. 


CHAPTER It 


: AGRARIAN PROBLEM 


AN 
i DISTRICT ZEMSTVO: a 
‘an Reform Commission under the presid 
D. Ag inks, ex-adjutant to the of * 
TA or of the Emigration Department, 
2 


had begun i 
Yalta, in co-operation with an A prarian Refo — 


Was 


tatives of the “democratic” societies, and the con- 

pe” supporters of big landed estates, had all stated their 

— veticuae point of view with considerable violence. 
claim 


favour forcible appropriation, but wanted compensation 

for the dispossessed, declaring that “property is sacred”, and 
ions of any kind imposed on ig properties could 

f the country. It was 


conditions, In its efforts to Steer a idle course and find some 


were adapted to local needs. l 

Newspapers mentioning the work of the y Se Com- 
mission found their way across the Red frontier, Peasants from 
the southern distri&ts of Northern Taurida sneaked across the 
ttontier and came to Sebastopol. They told us something about 


è Zemitro = Eleĝive District Cound. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
190 


er inion of the Peasants be 

the 2 — a bs gr he the new Con yond : 
Chief presse to deal with the land question and the pr oblen 

of local 1 called themselves FEPresentatives of th 
I invited 2 d set me, and J had a lon : 
peasant Soviets to come an I ordered § and 
detailed interview with them. Later, ack c enator inks 
to co-ordinate and tabulate their deman Ss SO that the Com. 
ission could take them into account, Provided that ey 
— not opposed to any of our general principles, The 

peasants told me that the whole Population ol their distri 
was tired of the Soviet s stem an en unisth—all., that jg 
except the beggars and the disorderly elements. The 
Wanted peace, order, and a normal State of affairs to be re 
to the countryside, They wanted laws concerning the lan 
self-povernment to be promulgated, Putting local overnment 
and into their own S; they 

Promised to act wisely, economically, and justly, withe 
cheating anyone or destroying the large landed estates Which 
were still intact. On these conditions only, th declar 


enikin’s legislative measures, total uncertainty reigned as to 
the legal Situation, while lack of security in the Countryside 

ad led to complete economic disorder, 

The revolutionary wave which had engulfed the landed 
Property of the Nobility had also demolished the bases of the 
agrarian organization of Pre-revolutionary Russia. It had Swept 
away the estate-owning aristocrats, but at the same time it had 


» tuined th farmers, disor lease gements, and 
canned to the height of their power those obscure forces which 
called themselves the “poo 


t peasantry”; these creatures preyed 
on the countryside, terrorizing all E hard-working b alle 
and relied for support on the Soviet Power. 


RABIAN PROBLEM AND THE DISTRICT ZEMSTVO 
` 191 
$ Acratlons on One side, actual cond: 
psideration: actual con : 
pê count permit of a testotation of the Ane 
‘The old arrangements were all disor yaen, 


> 
tecruitmen 
ur changed; there was no lo cf any — 


safety of 


essai > d rally them to the defence of order and national 

nies je was an especially good opportunity to make a 

bie impression on ear peasants, Sie snatch awar the 
„ principal weapon of propaganda againg Mhi 

auf, Airs Baa c had to af = 3 

Fur object in fighting the Reds was no other than to 


inst those who had infringed these rights. 
Wege on the plan of publishing a Prikaze concerning 
ae Land, based on the pressing needs of life as I had already 
jefned them in my dispatch of * sth. This Prikaze had 
wo be elaborated, promulgated, and executed without further 
delay if the ts were to know what the Russian Army 
ghich was freeing them from the Bolshevist yoke could and 
would do fot them. The White Movement had to define its 
mitude to the agrarian question in an unmistakable manner, 
and emphasize the sincerity of the National Power's intentions. 
The fundamental | es te of the reform were set out 
later in some of my dispatches : — 
The land for the people, and li in the 
State (Prikaze of May 20th, No, ars ae 
And again :— 
e aas 
Tay th, No 50 its management and good order (Prikaze of 
As soon as he received my instructions and official order 
E Glinka proceeded with the work I had entrusted to 
drat 228 finished it. Towards the middle of May, the first 
and Í had ¢ Land and Local Government Laws were ready, 
mad ratified them. Later, they were discussed by my 
— my presidency. By May 18th G. V. Glinka had 
his dras to the members of the Council, and 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
ested that they should express their opinion on the. 

— Opinions Aüterec very much. The majority wer 
alarmed by the size of the task, and feared the obstacle. thar 
stood in the way of its realization. Only the military Member 
of the Council, who reflected the opinion of the Arm d 
were supported by the commanders of the troops at the front 
fully realized the important psychological effects that the 
immediate promulgation of this measure would have on the 
Army and Ae civil population, 

A. V. Krivochein arrived two days later, and he too under. 
stood the psychological importance of the decision I had taken. 
here again he displayed an keen sense of political realities and 

e elasticity of his mind. i l 
Thi int is far from perfect,“ said M. Krivochein, “but 
it will make the success of the Army easier and will wi 
the sympathies of the peasants. Since the Army is expecti 
a decisive pronouncement on the agrarian question, there is 
no time to be lost; liſe itself will add all the necessary amend. 
ments in the future.“ He did insist, however, that the “Prikaze 
concerning the Land” should be published in the form of 2 
dispatch, and advised me to call the Agrarian Commissions 
provided for in the Law “Agrarian Soviets”, A dispatch 
drawn up in the martial atmosphere of a military camp was not 
expected to be so perfect in form as a law promulgated under 
normal conditions. 

The Prikaze concerning the Land was published on 
May 25, 1920, together with an official communiqué giving 
a detailed explanation of the causes and conditions which had 
inspited its promulgation, and indicating its tenor and 
importance, 

t was promulgated, together with the Regulations and the 
Temporary Statute which was attached to it, on June 27th 
in a slightly altered form; it was done by means of a ukase of 
the Senate which was functioning as three departments; it 

ad been reconstituted in the Don area under General 
are Government, and had since been transferred to 
ta. 


The Senate had deemed it useful to add the following 
declarations to its ukase ;— 


The Prikaze of the Regent, who possesses lenaty powers, 
gives the land to its cultivators, who will till ie in erpetua 
hereditary ownership; but they are not to obtain it free of all 


Sta i 
page che proceeds as compensation for the old — — = 
tes ch a tocess of change, tedivision, and teallotment 
AA gits in with our people's Conception of justice and 
oft pe historical development of Imperial agrarian legislation 
jh ow on, 4 regular agrarian system and the material 
ing of the workers on the land will be assured to th 
el ge. The new ee — be — with che ¢0-opera- 
ltivators themselves, under the sy 
bon o ane and Commander-in-Chief, kiia 
of a object of the agrarian law is the general welfare of the 
and it will serve as the basis of Russia’s economic power. 
g jenceforth the disputes, the discontent, the many dissen- 
cops over the agrarian question, will be silenced} Every loyal 
a of our martyred country is bound not only by law, but by 
son ‘ence, to USC all his strength and wisdom to forget his 
onal interests, and co-operate with the Regent and Com. 
pe ec-in-Chief in putting the Land Law into effect as quickly 
tee completely as possible. 


The entire 3 rarian reform was based on one idea—the 
consolidation o the law of private property without distinc- 
on of social class. It is true that a change of owners was 
“ vided for; landed property was to undergo a new division, 
use national interest * — Pye cap over the 
of private property. Nevertheless, the new agrarian 
23 based on the solid bond which binds the owner to 
tis land—his right of ownership, which not only leaves him 
in sife possession to enjoy it, but gives him the right to dispose 
of it Geely. Furthermore, until an effective redivision took 
place, he had the right to ask for an allotment of his part of 
the land. 


All the land which passed to the owner-cultivators was to 
become their own property on condition that paid an 
indemnity to the State; this was assessed at a rate favourable 
to the purchasers, and gave wide facilities for casy payment. 

The selecting of the landowners who had the right to share 
in the redivision of land and the fixing of the maximum size 
of the lots, was to be done by the local representatives of the 

the ian Soviets of each district. The composition 

of these Soviets was such that the peasant proprietors, the 

most stable clement of the rural population, acquired a 

. voice in the adaptation of the law to local economic 
ons, 


O 


u PROBLEM AND THE DISTRICT NMS vo = 
* A The new owners will have to ay the "i 


194 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


cultivators, and provided for in one * the quali 
province of Russia. On the contra „each distrig eve 
decide for itself the question of redistrib trict va Y 
its own boundaries. This local charact With 
characteristic of the Prikaze, and combined l he dae 
advantages as well as the disadvantages of the; Se Practica 
the very 2 of those huge, unrealizable de I 
general redistribution of all the land amongst al] the s for a 
which would necessitate the forcible transfer of tear Lople, 
of the rural population from north to south and mas 
ak across one-sixth of the surface of the globe, 
ecause no maximum size for roperty had bee 

possibility of retaining some of e old estates —— the 
especially if, in the opinion of the people of a district] up, 
conditions demanded their maintenance in the interests f 
internal peace and the stability of the local economic system. 

The actual holders of the land coming within the Scope of 
the Prikaze were to pay their redemption fee into the treasy 
in corn or coin, Payments were due from the moment when 
the Prikaze was applied to the land of a given district, without 
waiting for the completion of all the formalities of consolida- 
tion. These payments were to be discharged afterwards 
instalments to be fixed when the property was consolidate 
and were to continue until the sum due to the State for the 
repurchase of the land had been paid off. In the case of non. 
payment after a specified period, the plot of ground, con- 
5 — or not, which was held by a defaulter, was to be 
handed over to another by permission of the A grarian Soviet, 
and this new holder sould claim consolidation of the property 
for himself (Arts, 8 and 10 of the Prikaze). 

The head of the Financial ent was requested to draw 
up and present to the Commander-in-Chief for ratification with 

pannie speed, a draft of the bases for the assessments, 

the formulæ and time-limits which were to govern the relations 


~~ 


"i RIAN 
ph esp? iat financiers THE 
2 ot money n, and and DISTR 
used | ways th i 
oat gcemed in A of co * 
aise i the e > wh STVO 
1 to them asc, b nts sea * Thi Treas ov 
7 N ae the 3 oot re rary ry of 
he pric of oe hing ion of 
rand bods Í 2 SAET isad not £ pe rov 
ont to a lot ap lyi tod hi t in vam app pains? oke 
på ben se any Abr th Eh Reta Ages ey, the 
w ent an sion tra e Prik d mu and the the 
¢ the ony the ry proc aze W ft be insihed th 
of orm ille tand d cedi ere redu that 
“5 damag to be gal sei itag tre 3 at 
places eto carri izu th anst i r 
jecreasin ’ and rural ed — an c the yn the 
— * agii hea econo 0 * Revolution, an 
— the pri N onomy, whi witl 88 8 
roe ey I ouput, Parag ch was ai ot to 
to be miy a fall pos ** sale still sou am 
sie po * „ possessio * di 
m sessio against title en of tof t — 
aa wa P vi ee bahay 0 
ye . olent sei cpe ag a * 
ag nan us th wh seizu rson i van e 
ee ot o h ho are wod Nr hei 
Exittin į aag tapas d La orkin of The posesor 
ting ae n-Chi “s occu aw co 28 
— Jalto d. wi N ing Mt, or to remain 
+ Sora thout ssion by the ap sing it i 
[oétituts all jon wa — the R plie r 
E ER each with cs i ord story paz 
tenia s 0 . en appa invi den of 
mg mA — ten & A empo inviolable the 
. anions Derine 
—— Apa ger» ; the 2 Soin wie — 
de . as —— presi N 52 5 Agrarian 
loca wage dee , dent. Seema 2 
* erent! Dp ety grarian 
à delegate i rest’ Ne. 
tvo of tor, whee oa , N but 
fr th wer t as 
mp es the same o be er the . w 
„Stat. 2 23 ere to 
eek ma he e 
o), y the af Finan Justice the Presi a 
igri ce, and of the den 
2 
les 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL edad 8 

i co USIVe} 
institutions, one y 
To these e, ar the local popalation and the other of m,e 
represenratiy +7 the widest ae € app Cation 
than half, I fi were to settle every question, averses — 
ization armation of their claims Owners: 
dgl to ** 4 PX] et up boundaries between the a 
redistribute the lawful owner land which had been acquiri 


of the reform, it was label thes 
incial authorities, but on! wulle 
‘ * au $ in 
Ki heir Ret laws and by order of the — 
— or in the lawful l private persons, Society, or 
Stat., Att. 14}. ; 
e very effectively submitted the whole 
agrarian problem to the decision of the agricultural population 
itself, The functions of the Government officials who were to 
superintend agtatian questions and of the official mediators for 
the distriéts and provinces were limited to consolidating the 
work of the district agrarian institutions and supporting them 
in their activities so long as these were within the law. 
On July rsth my Prikaze concerning the Local Zemstvo 


was published, 


PRIKAZE ISSUED BY THE REGENT AND ComMANDER-IN~CHIEF oF 
THE ARMED Forces or Sour RUSSIA 


8 No. 94. July 15-28, 1920. 
(cui Branch of the Adminitration,) 


The remission of the land in full ownership to the culti- 
into small belehnt on it, and the division of the great estates 
mee Zens, necessitates a modification of the Structure 
erstwhile new class of small landowners drawn from the 
and — — be given a part in the difficult 
ait ep al aerat ie Zines sg 

wi 4 are to control local i : 8 be 
"sponsible for their good order and — we 


0 p ERE ka DISTRICT ZEMSTVO 197 
mv or ration based on thi 2 
yt ofl Abel in the rebuilding of the eee = 
pe sa? pvince that * great one of the peasants who are 
17M ied upon to play a Presominating part in the new 
at > on of the Zemstvos will respond unanimously to this 
ott wm sink their best efforts for the work, and will collabo- 
„e work J require of them for the welfare of their 
git W. LIntil some National Power can promulgate a peneral 
co nitive Statute concerning the Zemstvo, this Temporary 
10d "sg to be introduced into all territory occupied by the 
geté of the Commander-in-Chicf of the Armed Forces of 


Russia. 
(Signed) GeneraL WRANGEL, 
SENATOR GLINKA. 


uboration of the N for the constitution was 
in tion with representatives from the 
gored Pogether with several experts. 
i leading ideas of the Prikaze conceming the Land 
ted in a masterly fashion in an interview which 
gett Sunn, M. Krivochein, ex-Minister of Agriculture, gave 
* editor of 2 newspaper called the Lela Roisia. It 
© eared in the form of an editorial called “Launched on the 


įgicultural Campaign “ 

The in-Chief (said M. Krivochein) is calling 
der forces into free and creative action; he is posing the 
question of decentralization of local administration on a huge 
sale, for a large new class of small landowners has been 
seated and consolidated by the Prikaze concerning the 


Land. 

T have certain knowledge that these measures, together 
with other circumstances, have induced France to recogni 
our Government, and General Denikin could not tai 


Siberia. 

The Prikaze concerning the [and obligea on to proceed to 
a second measure: the reorganization of the administration 
and the local Zemstvo. 


198 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


The Revolution has 22 all the foundations and 
fied all the conditions of life. 
We realize clearly that the forms of local administration 
also be modified, a mug 
After our law is passed, the district will become the Cons 
of the Zemétvos’ activity. ’ 2 de 
Considering the 888 of . — 2 measure alone 
is & very progressive step, We are giving t smal) 
proprietors not only the aanagement of the Zeman, ea 


administrative . 
Our legi on ix thus more advanced than any other, 
Wegern E ‘ - 
As to the Lad Zange in fature it in to exercise th. 
ſunctiotis of the provincial Zemstvo. 
We are prepared to go even farther on the same lines. 
wil be the attitude of the small landowners any 


fa 
J 
i 
3 
3 
2 
2 
5 
j 
3 


the Charch? Whar will heppen to the schools, the tals 
and Justice, under their rule: The course of all future orms 


Very soon we will take the darin but necessary step of 
laying the foundations of the future Zemstvos and the Rene 
We believe that it will lead to the recovery of the creat 
forces of national culture. * 


After this information reached them, the Army and the 
pave gave the Temporary Statute co ing the 
vo and the Prikaze concerning the Land a very good 


BLEM AND THE 
gRARIAN pRO DISTRICT ZEMSTVO igs 


qe shin the remarkably short time of six m 

. ont 

* aue dually introduced into ninety of the one — 

den Figgis under occupano. 

N ven cible that if this unanimity of opinion berween the 
4 De the peasants heen achieved at the time when 


Kosta F of Russia was still free from the Red yoke, the 
gi ache White Movement would have been quite different. 
A a es? Perhaps the days of the Soviet Power would have 


pered. 

ben dun Aale of June the necessary preparatory work 

By the mide of 5 Prikaze had been 58 — 

aes? urge tracts of land liable to expropriation were in the 
occupied territories, Melitopol, Dnieptovsk, and 

e application of the Prikaze to the land in 


of Pere fy = 
„reà, which Was the one nearest to the enemy, obviously 
ths ug special im rtance, Therefore it was decided to 


t district — mediators in these districts first, and 
jaer on to districts farther south. The new aptarian 
OF) sath in Yalta, be here w 
organization was NOt 5 in Yalta, because there were no 
esates in that district, and the coast was given up to 
populat seaside resorts. Later, a District Agrarian Soviet was 
gt up in the district of Baidary, and was attached to the one 
in Simferopol. As soon as Berdiansk was occupied, an agrarian 
mediator was appointed there. 
At the beginnin of July the agrarian mediators, with 
te Rafts of adjutants, surveyors, and agronomists, set 
oot for their districts and began work, Towards the end of 
jolt the elections for the District Agrarian Soviets had been 
in a large number of districts, in spite of great difficulties 
= yen 2 o$ * times. Although it was 3 28 
* work is at high pressure, the ts voluntarily 
took part in the cles É really aul the wotthiest 
ives of the countryside were returned to the 


great landed proprietors. 

The Agrarian Soviets set to work immediately after the 

abe ne they worked on the returns of the reserve lands 

the e to redistribution amongst the cultivators, the fixing of 
maximum amount of land assignable to new Owners, 4 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
20 
s for the | 
census of the average figures of the crop 10 ten * 


sO on. > i 5 , 
* norma! maximum for the plots differed widely, 000 
ing to economic conditions, and these were very varied: the 
A t of reserve land in any two distrig, 


was not the same amoun 
but in every case land was allotted with an eye to the 3 


sities of life. The ailotments varied in size from thitty to sey 
deciatins, and were even as large as one hundred or 
hundred and fifty deciatias. In the Berdiansk district alone 
they were as small as twenty deciatins, and a few plots in the 
Simferopol district were only ten deciatins; here fruit growing 


and market- predominated, 
When calculatin the amount rire that the old ow 
were to be al ‘ Agranan iets enctally fixed 
one hundred to one hundred and fifty declating s but in a fen 
cases they found it necessary to take the size of the owner's 
family into consideration, or the part he had played in the 
Civil War, or, above everything else, his onal administra. 


tion of his e@ate, and whether or no he had roved arri 
culture un it. In a large number of cases these consideran 
resulted in the amount of land left to the old owners bei 


fused to two, three, four, or even five hundred deciatins 


All this is abundant ian instituti 
Were applied with the utmost freedoms, pith for local 
iey 5 yr agtatian theories, and t the tatives 
br base mke ae Authority, who were colleagues 
* had absolutely no idea of putting pressure 

It * than jus not to mention here the zealous, 

that small Staff who were 


PROBLEM AND THE DISTRICT ZEMSTVO 


„pARIA Š 
d cons, I explained to the population the sioni 
f fit wid = to them to work wi m 
14 y expressed my belief that the new 
Pet the performing their functions, would take the 
Corres qational economy and national needs into con- 


e A ee s Communiqué on the Agrarian Reform ) 


1 1 * 1 7 
ag gos 0 my appeal and did their work with scrupu. 


oa them of the national economy, ney 
por ye little the new Power was revealing itself, and the 
pr: 


ce * Therefore it inspired greater and even greater 


s coc of living, was a striking proof of this co 
ots 
APPEAL 


of Russia, hear why we are fighting! We are fighting 
for broken faith; for violated sanGuaries; for the liberation 
of the Russian people from the yoke of communist rogues and 
ide who have shattered Holy Russia to her depths; for 
the ending of the Civil War; for the giving of the land in full 
ownership to the peasant who tills it, he may devote 
himself to peaceful work; for the sovereignty of real uberty 
in Russia, so that the people may choose their makter for 


themselves. 
People of Russia, help me to save our country! 
GeneraL Waancet. 


CHAPTER IV 
ON THE EVE OF THE OFFENSiy, 


Since my arrival in the Crimea I had been worki 3 
twelve kon a day, and I expetted my colleagues a a 


same. 
ly day be at seven o'clock a. m.; at eight o' 
Pek the iet of Kal. the commander of the Ft l 
chief of the Military Administration, and any other Visitor, 
This went on until one o'clock, when I dined. From ty, 
o’clock till six I received reports from other branches of the 
22 ͤ ͤ six and eight, when T had suppe 
I nearly always fitted in interviews with peo le who had com, 
and with whom I wanted to have | 
ple such as representatives of the Allied Missions and 30 On. 
ia the very few days when I had a free hour before Supper 
I used to go round the town with my aide-de and visit 
the hospitals and houses of refuge. In the evening I attended 
the meeting of the Council of the directors of the administra. 
tion, or read dispatches, or attended to my vast correspondence. 
I never went to bed until eleven o’clock or midnight, 

During the first week or so visitors were especially numerous, 
They came to see me about the most trifling questions. On 
two occasions I even had to deal with lunatics. 

On one occasion I was told that there was an engineer, 
a naval mechanic, amongst the list of visitors; he wanted to 
sce me about his invention, which, he said, had considerable 
importance at the present Sage of the war. The inventor 
would not share his secret with anyone but the Commander- 
in-Chief. I received him. He was quite a young man, and 

looked puny and ill. He seemed v excited, I invited him to 
sit down, and told him I had heard his invention and wanted 
to know what it was. 


‘Your Excellency, I all 
did T not believe is would not have troubled you at 


you, and you can trust no one. This 
I have invented can be of enormous 
Dua 


EVH OF THE OFFENSIVE 205 
a kin of compass. You can fix it to a 
og 10 Ji desk 30 chat it is invisible. Now suppose you 
gob jout meone about whom you know very little. 
button of my instrument, quite impor- 
un Py the needle will show you on this screen who the 
sod t het he 18 4 Germanophile, a supporter ot the 
mocrat, OF 4 Monarchist. . « - 

of the instrument here. * 


ON THE 


se his porttono. « » * 
pe begas jmé the manager of an officers’ co-operative 
het j lonel, was among the visitots. He 
0 ** object of his visit very clearly and in great 
10 romised to help him, and as I was saying £ -bye 
geal 55 where be had served previously. . 
jd da i t at a military school in 
bes è joned its name. “J had the good fortune 
f » After a moment's 


jast time I saw him; he is 
the Czar 


. 
* 


known him the 


him. He greeted me, an 
cn him times and saw him, the ina, and their 


children. 
I bad gian] in changing the subject, but as soon as WS 
something else, the colonel became perfectly 


et Armies had been beaten 
all along the front with- 
the Poles, 

been 


normal again, 

The 12th, 1th, and 16th Sovi 
by the Poles, and were retreating 
out putting up any resistance. For several w 


up by Petlioura’s Ukrainian formations, 
from Polotzk 


cL an immense territory, extending 

: to the upper reaches If the Dnieper, the Kiev 

Erie a large part of the right bank of the Ukraine. 

Warn Command were throwing al ‘Ret situa on to the 

Cavalry a as a remedy for their disastrous situation. 

“Comrade” 1 first to be transferred. The ist Army, under 
denny, was moved from Caucasia; it was the 


mS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
mations. They even ty 


, MEMO 
Al the Red cavalry for 

grongest of cavalry division on the Crimean front to th. 
è 


he onl ) . 
E Polish front. The railways 18 South Russia had p 


Passes ey on miltuy 
their ) 

— and the re-establishment of order in the 
Crimea had not escaped the attention of the Red Comman 
and although they were devoting all their attention to the 
Polish campaign, they no longer disregarded the menace ig 
the Crimea. As early as April they had begun to send reinforce. 
ments for the 13th Army. By May its efectives had risen ty 
twelve thousand bayonets and three thousand sabres, 

A Kaff. colonel, the Lett Pauka, had been put at the head 
of the 13th Army. he Bolshevists were proceeding with 
intensive fortification works all along the front. The fortified 

sitions were furnished with large quantities of artillery, 
Information came through concerning the Bolshevists’ 
behind-the-line organizations and the repairing of the railways 
at the front. By May the Russian Army was already a con- 

al number of combatants at the front, 


siderable force. The total ni 
in reserve an hind-the- lines, was forty thousand men. All 


those who were fit to fight were in re iments. The material 
equipment had been put in order. We had ten tanks and 


twenty-one aeroplanes—althou gh they were old models and 
all of different types. Fortification works were in progress all 


along the front. The troops had been able to rest and recuperate, 


had become more favourable for us: not only could we set 
our minds at test o 
come, but we could again come to blows with the enemy. 
The difficult economic situation would not allow us to remain 
in the Crimea much longer. It became of vital importance that 
we should find an outlet into the rich southern distticts of 
Northern Taurida. This move, should it succeed, would have 
a favoutable repercussion on our political situation, 

On April zoth the forcible requisition of four thousand 
horses at a price fixed beforehand was ordered; for this 
purpose the Crimea was divided into five sections corre 
sponding to the five districts. The actual purchase of the horses 


ARREA SERB EF BSRALEFP PWV aANW eek x 


a7 & EB. 


on THE BVE OF THE OFFENSIVE * 


cunts Commissions, one for each district. 
pus bought, we were able to supply the 
À of the transport, and mount a cavalry 
A > gn cd rong, 

poo , (oot hunde mobilization of recruits born in 1990 
2 1 * Jered. In anticipation of the resumption of 
ns, and because ! attached special importance 


1 * 
44 OT Bing the sailway-transport of troops and the 
genom ng of the food-trains, I ut the management 
„the hands of the Chief of Military 


n 
ef ie lri as; 1 had cause to congratulate myself on this 


~ 

* NN 
= 
— 
2 
77 


E jatti- : d? P- 
ure ly with these military orders I was issuing a 

— for the civil administration. 
ses oF rary Statute concerning chiefs of the Civil Branch 
A Tempo commanders was promulgated on May trth: 


Anny COP ance guarantee that regular administrative 


vole a e eho wee to have the powers of prov : 
Such a chief of the Civil Branch was to . — 


ment of his district, and was to receive his general instructions 

from the chief of the Civil Administration. Within the Army 

’ area he was to see that the disttict chiefs and the 

of the town-and-country police forces (which were 

ible to him), the circuit-chiefs, and the iy tgene of the 

worked together. He had to organize t town-and- 

country police in the newly occupied territories, working 
through the district chicfs. 

At the service of the chief of the Civil Branch were the 
plenipotentiaries of the Finance, Justice, Commissariat, and 
Agricultural Departments ; they had to carry out his instructions 
eder heres, receiving them as general instructions 
= the chiefs of their reapeive departments. This measure 

iater said to be very cacious and useful. 

police force was reorganized on a new basis. The 
‘panment for the repression of offences against the common 


* 


206 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


law was separated from that for the repression of olit 

offences and was able to devote itself to its main + tical 
the pursuit of common-law criminals. The rumour b. 
Press that all the refugees evacuated from Novorossiisk the 
Odessa were being recalled to the Crimea annoyed me . 
much. Some of these refugees were in a truly lamentahy 
situation, especially those living on the desert island of Lemn le 
where the rate of infant mortality was shockingly high, Th. 
wrote desperate letters from there which aroused well-foung 

fears in the hearts of their relations. ed 

Russians are inclined to pass in one moment from complet 
depression to the most radiant optimism. Those who had 
said not Jong ago that the Crimea was a tomb, now regarded 
itas an impregnable fortress. Every day we received hundreds 
of demands and petitions, begging that such and such a person 
should be allowed to return to the Crimea, The columns of 
the newspapers were full of articles entitled “Let us rejoin 
our families,” “Will they never let us come back?” and so on 

Although I quite understood that officers and officials could 
not keep their minds on their work if they were anxious about 
the fate of their nearest and dearest all the time, I also knew 
that our situation was not yet absolutely safe, and that the 
return of the refugees would only aggravate the crisis in the 
Crimea. Therefore I put off the solution of this problem, 

Life behind-the-lines was gradually becoming more normal; 
goods were coming in from abroad, shops, theatres, and 
cinemas were opening again. Sebastopol was becoming more 
like its old self, and order reigned there. The soldiers in the 
streets were properly dressed and never failed to give the 


Kny salute, 

At the end of April I gave several dinners for the repre- 
sentatives of the Foreign Missions—English, French, Ameri- 
can, Japanese, Serbian, and Polish, and accepted invitations 
to dine at the English, French, and Japanese Missions, I was 
on the best of terms with the nag of every Mission. 
During my interviews with them I always emphasized 
importance of our fight, not only for Russia, but for all Europe, 
insisting that the menace of world-Bolshevism was not Jet 
over, and that Europe could not be easy in her mind so long 
as representatives of the International dwelt in Moscow; for 
they had set themselves the task of spreading their doétrine 
to all parts of the world. The economic equilibrium could not 


ee, Tna ë vF 3 & 


o THE EVE OF THE OFFENSIVE 207 


cched so long as one-sixth of the globe had no 
rch world-market. | 

Tot was taking every possible measure to enable us 

nous the struggle, 1 did not for one moment for 
tinue A was to provide for the evacuation of 

r oo a ulace in case Of failure, 

oe ined to launch an offensive in the near furure, 

ed to do all 1 could in advance to frustrate the 

* os of England, who most certainly wanted to 

men doing 80. At the same time I wanted to be able 

cut H BONY should we achieve one, to gain the support 

ig ase Out { requested P. B. Struve to return to Paris, 

1 fnr — General Milne, Commander of the English 
On May pation, arrived in Sebastopol. He came to sce me. 

ial object of his visit, he said, was to sce for himself 
„ results of the great reorganization in the Army and 

And che- ines in the Crimea, of which his — had told 

den His personal impressions in seen wed added, had 

st ly confirmed everything that he had told. 

Pulng our interview I touched on the difficult economic 
ation in the Crimea, 

i Baitish Government, which had taken the initiative in 

the negotianions with the Bolshevists, had not arrived at any 

definite result. Meanwhile, continued occupation of the 

Camea would mean starvation for the Army and the populace. 

Under these conditions J could sce no other course but to 

ty and enlarge our territory. General Milne was obviously 

metested in what I said, and attempted to investigate my 

mentions further, but I led the conversation into other 


$, 
May 16-29th, General Percy, Chief of the English Military 
sent me on the following Note: 


Beris Force ro Peacy Denattss 
l May 25h. 
* will send the following communication to General 
vagel in writing on behalf” 


what l eneral Wrangel that no chan 
Polish ive. repete in British policy as a result of 
ofensive, His jesty’s Government is determined to 


208 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

endeavour to bring hostilities in South Russia to 3 clo 

soon as possible, The Soviet have accepted Britain’s Prono. as 

for negotiations on the basis of a general amnesty, and salg 

Curzon is replying that he is anxious for these negotiation, r 
begin with as little delay as possible. The British Govern, o 
thinks that all negotiations should take place in South Rys at 
His Majesty's Government has asked me what I consider hp 
suitable place, and I shall be glad of General Wrangel’s opi. 3 
on this matter. I am instructed to explain to General Wana 
that he is not being left to negotiate alone with the Sovi 
Government. Lord Curzon is sending out a political officer N 
soon as possible to assist General Wrangel. Meanwhile, 


Soviet Government has agreed to the participation of 
British military representative. Ends. Acknowledge. Hie 


BririsH MiLrrary Mission, 
SEBASTOPOL. 


To the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of South Russia. 


Your EXcELLENCY, 
The above telegram received from the Commander-in- 
Chief of the British Army of the Black Sea is forwarded for 


your information. 
Percy (Brigadter-General), 
Commanding English Military Mission. 


Whilst the English continued to seek a compromise with 
the Soviet Government and insisted on the cessation of 
fighting, the French Government, supporting Poland now as 
ever, had quite a different point of view. In General Mangin’s 
interviews with M. Struve, his successor Prince Troubetzkoy, 
and myself, he had more than once raised the question of 
eventual collaboration between our troops, the Poles, and 
Ukrainians, On 4-17th May, Prince Troubetzkoy wrote to 
General Mangin :— 


You wished General Baron Wrangel to be informed that 
you would like to know his opinion on the question of eventual 
co-operation between the Armed Forces of South Russia and 
the Polish and Ukrainian armies. 

The Commander-in-Chief requests me to reply, and acquaint 
you with the policy he has decided to adopt hereafter, should 
events lead him to consider such co-operation. 

General Wrangel wishes to state first of all that he does not 


E OF THE 
on THE BY OFFENSIVE i 


the political side of the question, 

p” 70 posca — news of the political — — 

n ty plicat aad tse 2. 
is the es i} 

N AS wits, -$ this is — — RP 
$ Chief is ready to accept all the cnlla ailan 
Sei and will be more than willis Serene 

Poli d Ukrainian fotces. He thinks it advisable 
van OE of the armies fighting the Bolshevists should be given 
at es sion, and suggests that the arca bounded on 
giat by the Dnieper and on the north by the town of 

ir would be the distri in which the Russian 
— be of most use. 
Ame be understood that to preserve good order in 
It , the civil administration mugs be controlled by 
— A occupation authorities in each area, 

nis June rd Admiral Hope arrived in the Crimea 
Oa Ma 2h cruiser Cardiff. Pie se me another Note 
— she British Government. 


HMS. HCARDIFF”, No. 333. Jame 3, 1920. 


AE ES GE fe. 4 eS 


RF 


= to inform you that I have received a messa from 
A High Commissioner at Constantinople directing me 


quieted of your 
“a the Bolshevist forces. I am also ditecled to inform you 
E f you attack, the scheme for negotiations with the Soviet 
Corernment conceived by H.M. Government will inevitably 
fall and H.M. Government will be unable to concern 
itself any further with the fate of yout Army. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 

Your obedient servant, 

G. Hore (Rear-Adwiral). 


S Rares. S 


Te GAL WRANGEL, 
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of South Russia. 


_Tanswered these two English Notes on May 23rd-June sth 
as keter to the British High Commissioner. 
I have had the honour of receiving two messages from Your 
Ma ; the first was sent to me by General Percy on 
¥ téth-zoth, and the second by Admiral Hope on May 21st- 
Jane ztd. I hasten to reply as follows :— 
P 


X T BREE 


noms OF d- NA WRANGEL 


, idea of my icipating ditest 

th — Bolsheviks ech the British Gore in the 

undertaken ; therefore it is for the British Govemmen™ 

be hich the interviews with the Sovice * 
N ey ived an answer to my tele 

| have not yet recely telegram 
April r1th-z4th scat more than s month ago, in Which 1 
Fred out the necessity of using the resources of the — 


— Northern Taurida to feed my troops and the C 


population. ath este 
af cdrcum@ances now Ptomal 

r Foret for the enlargement of the zone occupied by a 

Army, so that I may ward off a severe crisis. Before I receives 


it. 

jeve that when H.M. Government 
4 La ape — the new factors, it will realize thay 
neither from the point of view of the commissariat question 
nor from the military @andpoint had I the choice of any other 
course but an offensive. Should my Army be victorious, it vil 
help the British Government enormously in its negotiations 
with the Soviets. 

There is also another essential consideration of a differen: 
nature, and I feel I ought to draw the attention of H.M. 
Government to it. The very admission of the possibility of an 
entenis with the 3 Sars mere 88 of bona · de 
guarantees to ensure ourin. agreement 

uc. I think it absolutely — that they should be 
Akai. sod Taid be siteads pattal be the Dkk 
Government if it would give me its opinion on this question. 
The recent examples of Bolshevist behaviour in the Kuban 
and Georgia, with whose Governments the Reds have jut 
signed treaties, are sufficient exemplification of the well-known 

Bolshevist rule of regarding all judicial and moral obligations 
as A many 28 judices, 

any case, I will allow myself to express the hope that so 
ae bg 8 — of is not explicitly 
s d, the ritish Government wi not refuse me the support 
it promised, which is so precious to me. 


A. V. Krivochein had a series of interviews with repre- 
sentatives of the French Government j is; 
some of them were very old friends of fi lone he left Paris 


—_ 7s 


Be PSP raw He 


Bos 


Si 


GENERAL WRANGEL WITH STAFF 


1655 


Ld 
| 


* 


* 


* 9 A * . 
iq bi et af Asi 
: Ti. 
j 


TE, 
a F g 


GCUNERAL WRANGEI GENFRAL CHATILOY 


BOGAYI TER y 


REVIEW OF THE TROOPS 


on THE EVE OF THE OFFENSIVE g 


t, the foll owing letters passed between A. V, 
65 ae N. Paléologue, Under-Secretary for Foreign 


oh A. V. Krivochein wrote to M, Paléologue :— 


s5ADOR, 
pur eat leave for the Crimes in a few days’ time; 
Í angel has summoned me for an interview, Ir would 
. seat preasut e 
I es of the Ftench Government in the con 
ee of his Hg — s Bolshevitts, in which he would 
gaston of the Poles and of any other force 
Pert in the conf, It would be very valuable 
capable de knew for certain that authoritative circles in 
ro N gnueg the importance of the existence of a piece af 
fnact ieitory, however small, on which normal governement 
ir rved for re future; a territory which remains 
e Allies and organizes a Government on European 
Soe iaw and liberty, where non-Bolshevift Russian 
can find a natural It is no less essential that 
— o | should be able to count on help from France 
ee war materials, and eventually, if it should prove 
ible to continue the Struggle, on French help in the 
ipon eration of the Crimea. 


beens he received the following answer:— 
75 
8, 1920. 
Misittry of Foreign Affairs, General Secretariat. 
Mr Dean MINISTER, 
I have not failed to submit your letter of yesterday to the 
President of the Council, the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 
lam pleased to be able to assure you that the Govern- 
the importance of a territory which has become 
the lag e of Russian n 


law and the Russian conscience. So lon Wrangel 

lacks the necessary guaran cs fot the seny of Bis oops we 

wil éndesronr to Lu hin wi get Ape 
to defend himself a — Be nevis attacks. wale 


which 
Black Sea fleet wi conte 1o prevent nrerin 
oa the shores of the Crimea. Fi 1 — 
become impossible, we will help with the evacuation in every 
possible way, 
With my very iaden regards, 

PALSOLOGUE. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL mire 
i n also had a series of interviews with Russia, 
2 politicians—M. N. Giers, o * member 
the Russian Diplomatic Corps; V. A. Maklakov, who had berg 
~eisional Government's Ambassador in Paris; Prince 
Lvov, A . ye * P. t Gouar, 
DT, ie ond any others Ail of them except ouch 
sp peaj Daian hins from associating himself with the hopeless 
mean enterprise. . 
Cn filiukov — others of his party put forward the following 
. of the smallness of the fragment of Russian territory 
to which the Struggle was now CO , the Commander-in- 
Chief of the “White” forces should not speak in the name of 
the Russian nation. He ought to be the Comma nder-in-Chief 
of the White troops only; the Russian nation should be 
ittee Of Russian politicians resident in 
politics, Under these conditions, 


tk ld raise our prestige j 
en tke f of N aka canki themselves “the salt 


of the (Russian) earth.” = 
Statesman whose 8 is — 

by all parties without exception; your work is necessary 
A — Russia. If you associate yourself with General 
undertaking, which is practically a gamble, 
„was Miliukov s argu- 


ment, 
M. Krivochein saw a party of our jots once again 

before he left. Nearly all of them consi that our campai 

lost, and did not believe that it was possi 


was 
for us to go on; they thought that all our efforts had been 


in vain. 

M. Krivochein was an experienced man and a judge of 
human nature, and he knew quite well that these dou 
would su the Army immediately if it won a success. 
Also, he fully realized what an effect a success, however short- 
. would have on the attitude of foreign Powers, j 
rance, 

I kept him informed of all the details of our mili 
situation and our preparations for the offensive; we 


oN THE EVE OF THE OFFENSIVE 
115 


grom this, should it succeed. Vet M. Krivochei 
2 ae belleve in success; he warned — of ga 
inte ration. 

bis op: -e wis to be launched on Ma * 

o Te oer eft for Feodossia, where Genent 3 
18 yas to embark and undertake coastal — 8 
n in the Crimea two months. When I arrived x 
[Dae Red wave was about to submerge the last rip of 
be OU around, and hundreds of thousands of Russians 2 
“griven to the sea saw the end a proaching. 
ins of the Army which had ae fighting for its 
icy for two years were rent by internal dissensions and 
en ost ith in their leaders; the military environment even 
tad Crowds of old men, women, and children were 
ws > for help, terror-stricken, ragged, and starving. 
1 was stretching out its bony hand towards them. 
Two months had gone by, and the Russian soldiers were 
ited once more under their national flag. Our tricolour was 
isd from the dust again, the regiments were armed with 
bayonets and were defending their native soil with their 
bodies, ready to renew the struggle for its liberation. 

Under their 3 the populace breathed freely once 
more; despair given place to hope, and love of country 
bad been kindled in their hearts. 

In place of the grisly spectre of death flamed the radiant 


image of victory. 


CHAPTER V 
FORWARD! 


had brought up fifteen to s 
— . aaa tek to four thousand sabr Sixteen 
the Russian Army. We had received recent information h 
the Red Command were preparing to launch a serious olie. 
sive in a few days’ time. umerically, our Army was ight 
superior to the enemy’s, and their morale was excellent. Te. 
troops had been reduced to four Army Corps :— 


General Koutepov's 1st Army Corps. 

General Slachtehov's znd Army Corps. 
General Pissarev i mixed Army Corps, 
General Abramov’s Don Army Corps. 


We had twenty-five thousand combatants, counting bayonets 
and sabres; the fleet contributed one-fifth to one-sixth of our 
total effective force. Only General Morozov’s 2nd Cavalry 
division of two thousand swordsmen, which formed part of 
the 1s Army Corps, and the mixed brigade of Terek and 
Astrakhan Cossacks, had 


ikain of May 218t put the following objeétives before 


General Slachtchoy’s 
Pissarev’s on the Salkovo front, so were toembark a 
— 1 a ee attack in the Kirillovka-Gorieloie area, cut 
Kora clitopol railway, and later co-operate with 


5 Pissarev an Koutepov were to attack the enemy 
an 


at dawn on Ma 25th, beat è 
the Dnieper, Ceren 2 d drive them back towards 
Corps in reserve at my disposal Was to keep the Don Army 
e had 


FORWARD 
tiy 


rt our left flank during the opera; 

ge o Pior the openi of hostllitics — The 

5 nom di barkation had been kept secret. ‘The Goes 
gh to" R ely spread the rumour that a dise ' — 

W pad PY iaoe neat Novorossiisk or Odes uon 

take ssa. General 

0 not to unseal his orders until he was i 


a r soth I signed the following appeal to the people: 


COMMANDER-IN-Coz 
p THE REGENT AND IEF OF THE 
O o Agwep Forces or Sour Russra 


-r No. 3226. May 20, 1920. 
ian Army is about to free its native soil from the 


Red Y opon all the Russian people to help me. 

j have signed the Law concerning the local Zemétvos, and I 

bre reconstituted the Zemstvos in the occupied territories. 
The agricultural land belonging to the State or to private 

will be given by the local Zemétvos themselves to 

those who till it. * 

call every Russian citizen to the defence of his country and 

to the works of peace, and I promise to pardon all wrongdoers 

who now return to our side. 

For the people—the land, and liberty in the framework of 

the State! 

For the land—a master chosen by the will of the people! 

May the blessing of God be upon us! 


T mR re FS o 


GENERAL WRANGEL. 


This appeal was made public on May 25th. 
The Prikaze concerning the Land had already gone to 


press, 
Í arrived at Feodossia on the morning of the 22nd, and 
found General Slachtchov’s troops embarking. The troops 
mide an excellent show. General Slachtchov himself was 
optimistic and self-confident. I spent only two or three hours 
tea pan I visited all the ships which had troops on 
and spoke to the officers and soldiers. I then gave my 


fral ingtruétions and went back to Sebastopol 
the evening of May 23rd my Gener Staff and T left for 
the front, 


On 
* oie, near 
arrived on the evening of the 24th, announcing 
thet General Slachtchoy’s troops had disembarked successfully 


IRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


h the disembarkation had 
difficult conditions and oa 


MEMO 
althoug 


216 

irillovka, 
pet oe under extremely 
a rans 8 May 25th, the Army opened the offens: ‘ 
along the front. General Pissarev’s units attacked the p A 
after a short prelude by the nuaa, supported by tanks ak 
armoured cars, whilst General Slachtchov’s coastal fore. a 
approaching the railway by forced marches, Artacked from th, 
front and threatened in the rear, the Reds fled almost wi hoe 
resisting, We took several hundred prisoners and two m S 
Simultaneously General Koutepov’s Army Corps Atta 
the bulk of the Soviet forces on the Perckop front. Tanks 
armoured cars went ahead of our troops to destroy the 

a fierce resistance. The Letr — 


wire. The Reds put up 
the most obstinate fighters. The Red artillerymen posted the; 
guns between the houses in the villages they were occupy; a 


and fired almost point-blank on our tanks. Many were wrecked 
but, nevertheless, the infantry used them to seize all the 
fortified positions. In this one day we took fifteen big 

and three armoured cars, not to mention the prisoners and 


*. 
inp 


On 3 
y 28t] eral Slachtchov took Melito i 
and succeeded in holding the town in spite of . — — 


from the Reds, who brought up mere reserves from Alexan- 
~ 0 j i 
Kahovka had also been reinforced, The | Red Comand vet 


FORWARD! 


saith The 1s Army Corps and the mixed Corps h 

Melis Actions. 

"seit P S! Hort and part of the Red infantry 

o the wot oss the Dnieper and blow up a forced 

p et en May 25th and the 30th the 13th Soviet Arm had 
tit thousand prisoners, thirty big guns, and < 

ont ed cars, besides a large number of machine-guns ke: 

mod agres of ammunition. On May 30th J ordered all the 

ae to complete the overthrow of the enemy by a vigorous 


po er o'clock in the afternoon I left for Sebastopol. 


e last few days the Red position at the f 
In w Whilst out Army had —— attacking hebt 1 
<hevists had been launching an offensive against the Poles, 
On May 27th the Red troops took Bielaia Tserkov, thus 
penetrating the Polish front. 

On May 30th they occupied Fastov and forced the passage 
of the Dnieper sixty versts to the north of Kiev, thus cutting 
of the pet rages railway, On May z ist the Polish troops 
abandone ` 
The Bolshevists made great play with their recent successes 
2 ne be kept as quiet as they could about their 

eat in the south. 

Urgent measures were indispensable if law and order were 
to be established in the newly occupied territories, Much had 
already been done. In some places there was already a certain 
amount of civil machinery centred in the Army Corps com- 
manders, for the Army carried high the flag of law and order. 
Isolated cases of breaches of the law by the troops were 
immediately and mercilessly punished. Military judicial com- 
missions and representatives of the people kept a jealous eye 
1 at the front. And yet all stronger measures were 


217 


eld 


Kere of the most urgent needs was the regularization of the 
On ME despionage system (especially the supervision sections). 
Th ày 28th an order was promulgated. 
hep oque character of the counter-espionage organs and 
orgs which their actions had, not without reason, 
ed in the days of my predecessors, made it absolutely 
90 back. to submit them to strict supervision. We decided to 
INguities © che pte-Revolutionary system, which submitted 
e brought against political criminals by a constable 


—— — a 


218 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


> the control of the Attorney. The Military Attorney. 
ade to cooperate with the Chief of the D it 
Justice, and regulations defining their powers were —— 
in great detail. My Prikaze of July 8th (No. 91) entrusted 15 
task of supervising criminal inquiries and political ne ö 
members of the Military Attorney’s department at the te to 
and to the Civil Attorney behind-the-lines. The et 
mentioned magistrates had to supervise all in sities A 

olitical matters, give as much help as they could, Watch 
legally of all arrests, and be responsible for the on. the 
under arrest. ae 
This was the first time in three years of Civil War 

political aétions had been submitted to the contro] oo 
Attorney. = 
On May zist a Prikaze was published appoint 
of Mi lisy Jurisdiction ; one was = be attached to thet — 
Staff of each Atmy Corps. Sas > 

The work of Bolshevist agents had been much less effeai 
lately, In April some of the members of the Central 8 
munist Organization at Simferopol had been atrested, ‘At 
this time “Comrade” Nicolas Ba an was their leader: he 
had come from Soviet Russia. This organization had set Sts 
hand to the wilful destruction of railway communications: th 
members did their utmo& to damage the tracks and the 
points, and blew up bridges and armoured trains, A lar e 
quantity of explosives fell into the hands of the police — 
result of the raid on the C.C.O,’s premises. This organization 
was in close touch with the Bolshevist section of the 7th 
Reserve Battalion garrisoned in Simferopol, the armoured-car 
detachment near the Commander-in-Chief’s Headquarters. and 
1 skulking in the mountains under Gn Orlov’s 
2 Shenae I have alread mentioned. 
ut the same time, a Bolshevist Organization at Kertch 


conducting their activities from the woods, i 
í erely k on 
rooms in the towns and other settlements 3 pepo: bo 


wi Soviet Russia. The ban 40 ” x 
of the tiffrat of Se snc aii consisted lar J 


ZY g 


2 


E Far Fe. 


= u GO SFO D nt ae & FS ov 


FORWARD! 
219 


d Bolshevists who had been tran 
nals aK Crimea, but who had escaped sported fram 
gering the winter. from Simferopol 


eserted spot at dead of night, leaving them 
. road and join the “Greens”, 4 — 
battle against enemy prop behind · the· lines 
veded an energetic and experienced man as its leader. I 
“4 to entrust it to General Klimovitch, ex-direttor of the 


pe ) 
ee Front the enemy were retreating in hasty disordcr. 
The 13th Soviet Army had suffered heavy losses during the 
gghting which had lasted from May 25th to June 4th. Almost 
seventy-five per cent. of the effeétives of some of their regiments 
had gone. During the retreat the enemy units had been thrown 
into on; they had lost touch with one another and 
with their General . Enormous quantities of reserve 
gores had fallen into our hands. The most fertile distticts of 
Northern Taurida were freed, and immediately the cost of 


Out cavalry obtained horses. A large amount of paper 
was issued just at a useful moment, and the units paid 


r of Military K punished all 
cases of arbitrary requisitioning without mercy. 
majority of cases the offender was a Don Cossack, for the 


the Cossack troops had simpl flowed in, but after two 
tegimental commanders had been forcibly discharged and the 


"hen the sick and wounded, the officials’ families, and the ert of the 
lun. Adern abandoned, the criminals in the prisons been evacuated behind the 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL w RANGEL 
230 


spite of our hea losses, the troops, stimula: 
vie 8 full of — The Population ha} Oy 
suspicious of us at first, fearing molestation and pilla in 
they were soon convinced that the Russian A Tmy ha to = by 
its character, and that our units had nothing in co 5 ey 
those of a few months ago, who had been indistingyigynit 
from Bolshevists, Many a time on my journeys | Would le 
to chat with the a in the villages, and 1 ne 
thing but good of our troops. 

"y mae cars Tehernaia Dolina to Kahovka, Where 
inspected the cavalry regiments of Genera! Bar vitek 
division. General Barbovitch was an excellent Cavaln | 
mander, he understood his work thoroughly, and W s 
brave and high-spirited man with an excepti 
character; he was as hard on other people as on hi 10 
had earned the respect and affection of his subordinates. 

Every section of the Ctimean Press Was unanimous in its 
rejoicing, 

When M. Krivochein attived, General Chatilov had been 
appointed chief of my Staff. I had forescen this appoi 
long ago, but J had put it off until a propitious moment should 


'h those being conducted on the Polish front, 
— dee Political situation excluded any possibility of a direct 
0 


18 aly Operations, without ty; Ourselves down to 
any political athens was capable of 
coping with this complicated political and military situation. 

On June 4th Went to Melitopol, and arrived there at 
ght. I went 1 eht from the Station to the Cathedral, 
where J heard the Te Deum After the service, I spoke to the 
People outside, and Explained to them that the Russian Army 
was bringing them not vengeance and reprisals, but liberation 
; iet and order; and that soon 
5 In of Fr would be able to live in safety and enjoy 
Ass of his labours under the Protection of the Russian 
= Ak bi tiefly essence of the measures we 
Proposed to take for the Organization of the district Zemsvos 


FORWARD! 


ongst the Peasants, At the same 
division 1 27 Appt: the authorities, friendly as 
iche  hasized Aan of the Population, would not 
I. se towards of the law, and should any occur, would 
wer preac 
of tean ercilessly. d listened to me in com- 
00 ne of —— the square echoed with 
P p ieee from thousands of t toats 

ete § 5 whic 

fice 


221 


CHAPTER VI 
IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 


Our success had alarmed the Bolshevists. The Soviet 
was sounding the alarm, and insisting that “the Lord Pres 
Crimea” must be pages altogether, or at least OF the 
confine himself Strictly to the Crimea once again, The de to 
agents redoubled their activities behind-the-lines, Late} Poo 
had been a fresh epidemic of unrest amongst the we 
the port. The workmen had advanced a number of e 
and since these had not been satisfied, they had gone re 
But by now the authorities were Strong enou k'e mae, 
energetic action. I ordered all the strikers to de di 5 — 
and had those who belonged to the mobilized classes ag 
the front immediately. At the same time I let it be — 8 
that, should there be any more trouble, it would be re 
with the utmost severity, The firmness which the N 
displayed sobered the malcontents. A few doze eben. 
8 were sent to the front, and as a 8 — 
— 1 W work; in spite of the difficulty of 
Cim E , e end of our occupation of the 
€ received n : 
The Agrarian Law was being nec Occupied territories 
the Prikaze concerning he Leni igi Be E 
Assemblies, and the peasants va was read in the local 
takably. But at the boom voiced their approval unmis- 
occurred. Many of the “dears some regrettable incidents 
authority, and representatives of the central 
: 1 y NO means the least i 
ympathy with the new important ones, had no 
circumvent ; new Jaw, and did wh 
arom it by giving it arbi what they could to 
cy had to be checked — —ͤ— This 


istrative . j 
inordinate ik 
with 8 advantage, of to ; attempting to turn the situation 

peasants. prove their personal relations 


r 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA * 


e Force was being organized in the newly 


lice ; 
te PO and the salaries of its members were based on 


8. 
Arm arge reserves of corn in Northern Taurida, and 
were langt band. Therefore we would be able to 


kt tipe Wè? a . 

bc de whole of the occupied area and Still have a su lus 

change for other things which we me i 
ition, petrol, oil, an coal were only to be 


A ces were gill 
Out pat not feed the Army. We had nothing to export 


ann, mall quantity of corn and perhaps salt. Local 
ost non-existent, for the barest cssentials 


except 
ine, and nearly everything bad to be unported from 


i jes WEIG 
broad, Our rouble continued to fa 
e negotiations which M. Struve had been 


in taxation. - * 
ne abroad with a view to raising a loan had come to 
really believed that our cause would be 


The Red troops were following up their success on the 
Polish front. ‘The Polish Army was in rapid retreat, French 

ini j d been supportin Poland was 
deeply shaken. France show an increasing 
irs, realizing perfectly well what a riceless 


es, for whom things had been going so badly. M. Struve, 
kilful advantage of the situation. 
He gave a number of lectures on our Rruge, telling of our 
success, emphasizing the new dire&ion of the Supreme Com- 
mand’s policy, and dwelling on the latest agrarian and admini- 
Grative reforms. The French Press reported some of these 
lectures and commented sym athetically on the broad liberal 
policy of the South Russian yernment”. 

M Struve had a series of interviews with various blic 
men, and finally M. Millerand, President of the French 
Council, received him. He showed great interest in the struggle 
in South Russia, and asked M. Struve to draw up for 

a written account of the Regent’s point of view on the Russian 


on, 
Therefore . 
the following le Juse 7 qth-2oth M. Struve sent M. Millerand 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


ATIC DEPARTMENT OF THE Coj 


Heap OF THE Dirron 
Arsen Forces OF Souru Russ), 


in-CHIEF OF THE 

Parts, 

he Armed F Yan 20, 193 

mmander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Sons 

en eg — me to communicate his ideas and — 

to you, in addition to his views on the present situation > 
Russia. I have alteady had occasion to give Your Ex 

a verbal account of the principles underlying General Wrang 

internal policy. These principles epitomize the whole of th, 

rience gained from the Russian Revolution, and are 5. 

follows: 


Seizure by the peasants of land belonging to landed 
— must be recognized wherever it has taken 
place. This is to be the basis of wide agricultural reforms 
which will assure full and complete ownership of the 
land to the peasants who cultivate it. The > 
Agrarian Revolution would thus be legalized and turned 
to the profit of the new owners of the soil, and an agrarian 
ization would be set up on the principle of private 
ownership, which is undoubtedly what the peasants want. 
2. The future organization of Russia must be based on an 
agreement between the existing new separate entities. 
These various new entities in Russia are at present hottile 
to one another, but they must unite into one great federa- 
tion based on an arran t to which they have all freely 
consented; this shall be the outcome of their common 
interests and economic needs. Our policy would in no 
wise seek to impose union by force. 

3. Whatever the future relations of the different parts of 
Russia which are now separate entities may be, the 
political organization of these countries and the con- 
ee 0 * union must be based oa Ds 

expression of public opinion i tative 
decay deka ee 8 apain 


Tu ning to the present situation in war-wracked Russi: 
the Bosh “ioe ent 's present Russian policy is based on 
Britain to put an end to the Civil War before anything else. 

8 -s -i that the Russian elements under General 
their independen b as Well as all those who have preserved 
gains the Soviet Powers, should zurrendet 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 


to the Red Army. I the British G 223 
o bet che end of the Civil Wat, this is neither enna Wants to 
gurable means of doing 50, for it would 1 — 
in beat, in the Russian Atmy into an unwilling € the bem 
cee the whole of Russia under th B Surrender, 


— n ` 2 terrors 2 - 
oF Militant Communism incarnate in the Soviet — 


ed Army. On the other hand, i ‘oe 
wd * an end by the two parties to ik and a War be 
andet present conditions take the form i ay — would 
er armed Forces of South Russia to the Red A DEAE 
41 delimitation * Soviet and anti-Bolhevin Ben 
to assure the necessary conditi 

— undet both —— Whateve r — 5 — 

be. a to the possibility of enduri iene 
gay be as to the possibility of enduring peace between the two 
1 if this plan — N dah wal bs an aid 
o Pe otber will be of no avail. The — CMa 
of the Armed Forces of South Russia would agree to the 
wermination of the Gvil War by some such arrangement as the 
above, but he cannot possibly consider surrendenng to Soviet 
Russia. 

Any agreement must guarantee the inviolability of the 
werritory occupied by General Wrangel’s Army within limits 
which will ensure the satisfaction of the elementary economic 
veds of the population, especially in the way of food pro 
doftion. Moreover, the encroachments which the Soviet Power 
have made on Cossack territories must be entirely retratied; 
General Wrangel has once more acknowledged their historic 
satonomy and peculiar form of government by an agreement 
with the Atamans who are elected by the Cossacks. 

General Wrangel thinks that the political entities of Caucasia 
ought also to be guaranteed against all Soviet aggression. 

Turning to the question of the resumption of economic 
relations with Soviet Russia: the belief that such a course of 
aon would exercise a pacific influence on the situation is 
certainly well founded, but if it is to succeed, it must be carried 
out methodically and consistently. This policy of establishing 
telations between Russia and the rest of the world must be 
1. on two fundamental principles of civilized economic 

(a) The law of 2 property. 
(b) Economic freedom. 


The application of these principles, even though it be to 
foreigners only, implies the Bed ot judicial and police otga- 
“ations to guarantee them. Unless hove principles are given 

Q 


=n MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
effective recognition and put into practice, the 
— * with Soviet Russia will be ta dati 
R ation of private pery in the fury 
1 recognition in the padt; that i tO say, dean 
by the Soviet Powers of all the tights and 
of foreigners in Bolshevitt Russia, and of al) the publi 


by the 


to 
order and therefore uni these are the Commander - in-Cluct 't 
aims, and he believes that ther realign uff ift Hansen 
hag Blur. Sate of anarchy into which the Communist régime 
has plunged her, making her the victim of monotone cecal 
experiments hitherto unknown to i i 
Yours faithfully, 


Whilst France was obvio drawing closer to land’s 
8 Kill hostile, Lloyd Geor 3 with 
the Soviets. The meeting of the Supreme Council of tht 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA O- 
zy 
to 
1 


; discussing the 
_, sbich ae Fee of Reparations was ah, Oe made 
oa the $v ) so deal 
25 political N the moment. ing — 
orge ccally erent views on the Russi ä 
oe beld ish Government had declared thar Gon Aus 
Ide Bur sibility r of the * 
. and the Eng filitary Missi 
ify Rus ‘ag had been left in the Cree tae a 
cal n bureau. General Percy, the head of the F i 
igh “ission, had behaved like a cct —— P 
y the negotiations. When he had heard that E 
diate with the Bolshevitts, he had telero ta 
to nego he had telegraphed 
5 Con t that he refused to take part. I knew that 
C 
farewell dinner to the Mission just before it left. 
11 27 words I expressed 2 n Anny felt 
‘ao from its sincere friends, and the 
a pring HOM Fission; 1 said that, politics on one side, 
Russian and lish officers and soldiers were bound together 
E 
‘ring the Great War, ci i and 
konout dear to soldier, which were 3 the 
Hed of the English Mission and his officers. This community 
of feeling had been especially precious to my companions-in- 
ums pr eg Reg sae its ruggie. 
General said in t he re ving to leave 
the j was rugling so heroically not only for te 
Russian am but for ms PANA paper: the eg — 
imparti of. a ier, 
Shing do ith politics, butas an English citizen he hoped 
that the English people would not abandon their 


„ ee ee FT F 


* to draw the attention of his Government to the 
ences which would ensue for all Europe if the 

Ante assian Army was definitely los. 

aii’ hoping that my Government's policy will change 

bere bc not yet abandoned all ho of returning to you 
at the head of another Military Mission. If this does not 


MENORS OF GENERAL WRANGEI 

re will be nothing for it but to 
coe A st he added, half jestingly. devoe 
** — no importance to his las remark, 
months later I received a letter from him. He Wrote k 7 
he was convinced of the disastrous character of his Citing 
ment’s present policy, he had left its service ang refuse 
divisional that had been offered him; he had * 
Canada, where be intended to devote himself ta 15 2 — 
Later on, my English friends confirmed these facts. atm, 

In the meantime we had received news that 
Jloba’s cavalry troop was drawing near to our on™ meade 
zudem side. The Army Corps units came up from he 
by rail and detrained at Volnovakha, Rozovka, and Te 
vokonctantinov ka Stations. 

I decided nor to allow the enemy to complete thei =x 
centration, but to wrest the initiative from them. I pay. 1 


On June 15th oe launched a vigorous ofmw 
against the Don Army Corps—they were a cavalry division 
and a half &rong, and asn. miana by cars and armours 

the rearguard, the Don troops 


af 


Ss JFS 


machi 
From the 17th until the 19th the Don troops continued to 
retreat, and [loba’s cavalry to advance towards the south-west. 
Jloba avoided day-time marches and went forward only by 
night, for he had suffered heavy losses from our aeroplanes. 
canwhile the struggle was Kill going on along the front 
where the znd Corps was stationed; thus General Slachtchov 
was not in a position to be of any assistance to the Don troo 
who were by fighting. However, on June 17th 
2nd won a definite success; General Slachtchov’s troops 
attacked the enemy and infli&ed a severe defeat on them. 
On the 19th our troops at last succeeded in occupying the 
pr sew which had been assigned to them for this operation. 
1 fighting force numbered ten to eleven thousand 
yonets and sabres altogether, whil& the approximate 


1 1111 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 


23 
of our troops at the front totalled fifteen 8 
; dred sabres. s 
a cavalry troops with which the enemy — — 
paint pered seven thousand five hundred ‘caval and six 
gs 2 und infantry. The 153th Soviet Army’s total gure was 
bea ive thousand bayonets and ten thousand cavalry, 
Pe at o'clock in the evening of Junt 19th I pave the Pollow- 
Te General Abramov: Leave a covering detachment. and 
before dawn on June 20th, attack the enemy in the south with 
your principal forces and try to surround their left wing. 
To Central Koutepow; First carry out the necessary regroup- 
ing, then, before the dawn of June zoth, strike a decisive blow 
on the north and north-east against the right flank and rear of 


the enemy. ; 
To General Slachtebov: Hold the enemy in check on your 
front. 


The directions ended with the following warning :— 


The success of this operation depends upon its secrecy, for 
it must be completely unexpected when it docs come, as well 
as upon the well-concerted action of the troops. 


I telephoned instructions to the Commander of each Army 


At dawn there was a skirmish on the front where the Don 
troops were stationed. The Cossacks’ offensive had clinched 
with the Red offensive. I wired to the Don troops to hold out, 
cot what it might, in order to give the 1st Army Corps a 
chance to turn the enemy’s flank and rear. I thanked the Don 


Cossacks for their recent gallantry and expressed my belief 
that they would do their duty. A 


The booming of the guns could be heard distinctly at 
Melitopol Station. Groups of citizens laden wich their belong- 
ings had prena nearby, and were asking if it was not time 
to leave the town, The General Staff was proceeding with its 
Work as usual, but even their nerves were at very high tension. 
all had a reserve force che regiment composed of pupils 
ftom the military schools; they were posted at Voznessenskoic, 
Gering Melitopol. 
At midday the tension reached its height. The several Army 
Fe Were in action, and we were not in direct communication 
them. The barrage became louder and more distinct. 


ni MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL - 


At last the whirring ofa screw .. . an aero lane 

train at a low altitude and sent a rackets ad Ver the 
down; the enemy was absolutely beaten and hemm 
our troops; General Tkatchov announced “the co 
downfall of the enemy”. plete 

The 1st Army Corps had attacked after a tapid march 
artillery had been stationed in the open country and had 5 Out 
fire on the Red troops who were attacking the Don E cneq 
Corps. Our armoured cars had broken through the mee 
Jloba’s cavalry and fired point-blank on the Reds, and și $ of 
taneously a squadron of aeroplanes had deluged the RE 
cavalry with a rain of machine-gun fire. “Comrade y €d 
had stopped the offensive against the Don troops and launch 
all his forces—nearly five cavalry brigades—apaing the *. 
Army Corps. But our troops had received the Red cavalry 
attack with rifle-fire, reinforced by shells and machine. 
fire. Our artillery had taken up an exposed position and opened 
fire on the enemy's flank, and at the same time the Don 
troops, who had recovered very quickly, had made 4 dash 
northward, 

Attacked in front and on their flank, and Overwhelmed 
by the machine-gun fire from our squadron of aeroplanes 
the mass of Re cavalry had been thrown into confusion 
and had taken to flight in all directions. The biggest detach- 
ment, with Jloba himself at its head, had made for the 
north, where the reserves of the and Army Corps and the 
armoured cars had met them and fired point-blank on the 
disordered mobs. Jloba had fallen back towards the south, 
but there again had come beneath the scourge of the 1st Army 
Corps, whose troops were pursuing the enemy in wagons, 
barting their path, and sprinkling it with i agua fire, 
* t cavalry had come up with the remnants of the Red 
divisions and had finally x joa them. A second dng of 


s 
tch 

e 

e oan 


Red cavalry had been hurrie northwards, but, colliding with 
the troops of the 1st Army Corps, they had been greeted with 
a murderous fire, so had fallen back towards the east, only to 
meet with the Don troops, Our advance-guard cavalry had 
pursued the fragments of the defeated enemy troops for a long 
time, the Reds putting up no resistance; many of them had 
abandoned their weary horses and lay hidden in the hamlets 
or ravines, 


“Comrade” Jloba’s cavalry troop was wiped out. The 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 
zji 


„ ghole artillery force, nearly forty bi 
game machine Buns As well as two thoun — tal 


\ veal k th 
pwd Hands. We also too three thousand h 
| 600 bur, of the and Cavalry division and Se Dan eee 


ts . 
eginen 4 with them. We took prison : 
ele e divisions: p er the General Staffs 
of th and zoth the Reds had agai 

une 19) 4. 5 es 
— ! of the Dnieper, and had actually ead cae ee — 
pe 


ape 
PP ag, but they were repulsed with heavy 
rately At the same time General Sacher 1 
ys ulsing fierce attacks f RS LR 
corps was repulsing $ P s from the Reds. 
en our 8 took up t te offensive all along the front. 
june 2300 t e enemy began a general retreat. The 
oper neat Orekhov and Alexandrovsk on June 2oth 
nd 231d had pos EA * thousand more prisoners and 
may trophies. tog: an ea 15th and the 23rd 
(daring which od the tenth really big operation of the 
an Army had taken place), we ha en more than 
eleven thousand prisoners, sixty big guns, three hundred 
machine-guns, two armoured cats, and a huge collection of 
bre arms and bayonets. Ihe Red Command's scheme for 
“purging” Northern Taurida of the Russian Army had proved 
a comple ‘ 

I took advantage of the lull at the front and went to inspe& 
the Don Army Corps. The regiments had all been remounted, 
and had been able to re-equip themselves adequately from the 
enormous gock of horses, saddles, and arms taken from 
Jioba’s cavalry troop. Only a few days previously the Cossacks, 
who were unused to fighting on foot, had given a very 
920 performance in battle; but now the Cossack cavalry 
a become a force to be reckoned with once more. As I 
watched the e der pet of the Cossack ranks march- 
Seer ey ie 5 — this magnificent resurrection of Russia’s 

ust be a dream, 
Ph mobilization which I had ordered was being carried 
l. Five weeks of incessant and heavy fighting 
put large numbers of men out of action. The ranks of the 


found, A certain number of soldiers and officers could still 
ought up from behind-the-lines; by dint of hard work, 
Staffs and numerous military administrations had been 


= * — 4 —— J 
Dr. OS OE eS A M 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


** ths no fi 
uppressed. In the last two mon ewer 

I and sixty e had — u wound = 
notwithstanding — 27 e H E A e , 

; undted an [ae Seer Se ya ae Ons 
N the civil and military administration y 
manded the immediate transference to the front of all Able. 
bodied soldiers employed behind-the-lines; their position, 
were to be given to men unfit for active service. An ex ion 
was made for specialists of all kinds and for chiefs of settion, 

ir superiors. 

and be Comptroller-General was to check off the numbers of 
effectives in the different military formations, and cut down 
the soldiers’ rations to the minimum, Nevertheless, in spite of 
all these precautions, the popan between the num 
combatants and the number of mouths which the Commis. 
sariat had to feed was Still one to five, The enormous number 
of wounded and prisoners, as well as considerable numbers 
of evacuated inhabitants who had returned mostly old men 
and invalids of one kind or another all added to the number 
of mouths to be fed behind-the-lines. Only a very smal] 
number of the unfit were still useful as reinforcements for the 
reserve regiments which atted as military instruétors to the 
new recruits and some of the prisoners (from whose ranks we 
always drew a large number of recruits). In most cases the 
commanders of the units and the divisional chiefs would make 
the first selection from their prisoners, and use them 
partly for service behind-the-lines and partly for active service, 
The rest 10 Se pions ere be consigned to concentration 
camps under the supervision of counter-espionage agents; the 
Communists would be eliminated and the — into the 
reserve regiments. 

= even so, all these sources of recruitment could not make 
id il er sakes ee oe ex. We hd t 
of the Armies of the no West sod “a mae tal he 
en Gensel Shin d the north, and also 

troops which had withdrawn into 


= 7 eS 


TT o = F 
es -r-nu 
> i O Hit 

E A 
* S 


—— 
—-— iO 
—_—_— FF 


N NORTHERN TAURIDA 
395 


ch we had just occupied was tich i i 
e re os able to mount the regular was A 2 horses, 
M we regiment 
yee ra un Cossacks, and horse patt of the artill 5 
e Leben Il lacked horses for our tran ms 
2 eel to order a supplementary mobilization of = > 
on horses: t was cs jally difficult for the ye 
“ts zuch 4 large number as field-work was in 2 perme 
dong tO lighten the burden for the population ! 
jo 1 possibly could; to this end I ordered the troops to 
‘ harvest-work and the winter sowing of corn; 
pit ere free at the time were to help, and the tran 2 
gho W Th chi =— * sport 
gaY rere tO be used. Those c iefs of the civil administration 
or vee in closest touch with the Army Corps were to 
tion concerning the number of horses and 
ode necessary for gathering in the harvest. Thereupon the 
commanders were to give the necessary instruc- 
Ass) Ge kommander of the units were to be r — for 
i uon, whilst the divisional and Army Corps Chiefs 
to supervise. Every Army Corps was to send me a w 
hat had been done. I warned the tr that 
pold hold the chief of a unit responsible if I found that the 
jaret bad not been gathered in from the fields neat which 


bjs unit was sationen, 
of the enemy's enormous numerical superiority, 
echnical aids to such as aeroplanes, tanks, 
moored cats, acquired particular importance for us. In the 
ts, our aeroplanes had rendered us in- 
all the machines, twenty OF thirty of 


rere i 
would be unfit for use for a month or six weeks to come. 
The tanks and armo cars were in a similar rams : 
0 


uted 
condition, and it was a tribute to — 0 
still in use at all. 

dean ail and robber were only to be obtained be 
aut and that only with the greatest difficulty ; we felt the 

gs w7 y indeed. i , 
We all our necessaries in Rumania. Bulgaria, and 
male attempts to utilize the Russian stocks in Trebi- 
were fruitless—the di i . 
e 

es on a thousan one By u 

of expedients and working on the — of British 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
santinople, we managed to avoid A 
dered a great deal of time and 
N h more serious difficulty we O't, 
cre was also a muc : | y i 
Nr he necessary foreign * Al — . oO, 
i i i ; rowing sic ! Worse. ur r 
financial situation was g , : 
reserves of foreign money W pies, Hy ay and we — 
not receiving any more; our rou ai see 7 war Com Me 
our sole exportable commodity, an 185 y way of en String 
the re- equipment of the Army with war material was S 
exchange corn for ammunition. The idea of a mono iy 
orn had to be very seriously considered. du ch 


the export of c : 
a pen ee would inevitably provoke discontent in Certa; 
commercial circles whose first care was personal Profir, but 


from the national point of view no other course was ossible 

Northern Taurida gradually became more sett ed, ang 
the Zemstvo resumed its work. The whole of its complex 
machinery had been disorganized, and had to be built tp 
again from the very beginning. À 

The lack of men had become serious. Already it was rare ti 
find experienced officers in the regiments, Penury was til 
very widespread in the civil administration. In my prede. 
cessor’s time the administration had been overrun with a 
personnel which had been chosen at random. Later, when the 
Armed Forces of South Russia had collapsed, a large number 
of these officials had left the country, and the only ones sti] 
left in most branches of the administration were those who 
had been unable to go abroad for some reason ot another, 


414 
resentatives in Con 


obstacles. But we squan 


they were all “twentieth mend. Under su itions i 
dit 8 Ie nd Sayti work from oe oo 
© Deginning of his activities as my adiu 
ss y my Council, M, Krivochein had y (araen gey han 
— Ba urging them to work. But nobody could 
Pg do 8 ote his energy to a cause which was, in 
ER 5 ot everyone, hopeless. Most of them refused ‘on 
others urged persothets Some pleaded reasons of health 
hers Be A eaters reasons, others again declared that 
L c in the cause, and in themselyes too, 


his interviews with me, M vochein complained 


e — 1 = 


A oe 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 253 


“py { 
Ar a eke on continued succe,” he sid 
ann $ € oil and petrol areas 
of Caucasia, foreipners will support us; we shall have money. 
d then we shall be able to obtain all we want.” ; 
We discussed the present situation at great length, secking 
way out. The little Crimea could not continue to feed an 
yy for very much longer. Our base was too small. and we 
8 uld not . undertake widespread operations against 
he Soviet Armies trom it. It was necessary to enlarge our base 
„pd seize new arcas rich in natural wealth, which could give 
ss new sources of re-equipment and ensure foreign credit. 
t before we could enlarge our territory we had to increase 
she re of our Army, and this seemed an impossible task in 


a 


to er of our lack of technical equipment, arms, and ammuni- 
ill da Thus it seemed to be a vicious circle. The Poles were 
ting all along the front. During the last few days their 


t had degenerated into a disorderly flight. It was already 
‘ble for the Red Command to detach troops from the 
ich front and send them er lately we had noticed 
may new divisions on our front; they had come up from the 
get. In a very short time the Reds would be finished with the 
Ples and would be able to launch all their forces against us. 
The only possible source of recruitment still open to us was 
de Cossack territories. When General Denikin’s armies had 
, tens of thousands of Cossacks had returned to their 
nitive villages, taking with them horses, arms, and ammuni- 
tin, Enormous stocks of ammunition had been abandoned in 
Northem Caucasia and the Don. In spite of the bloody warfare 
which had been raging in the Don and Caucasia for so many 
jars, these districts were still rich in natural resources, Every- 
ting seemed to point to our aal the struggle into 
Cossack territory. The information which we received from 
— gence Service in the Kuban and the Don seemed 
bedeute da many villages the Cossacks had revolted agai 
bind owe The N hid our scouts and sup- 
et ve also whenever they had the 3 It is true 
learnt of the measures which the Red Command 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
236 


ad tak disarm the population; many of the C.. 
Di — — to Centr Russia. * Cosa 
The campaign which was to enlarge our base by exten 
it to Cossack territories could only succeed if it were suppose 
by local bodies; as our troops 3 would have toh 
a general rising of the population. k ee NOt spare * 
considerable forces for this campaign, for the defence of 2 
ranary, Northern T aurida, was a matter of life and hon, 
or us. We would only be 8 1o tali the troops to ath 

i ithmus later on, when an WE WON great ins. 
——— fear conquered the fertile districts oF ne 
Caucasia; then we could fortify our position and throw th 

reater part of our troops towards the cast to consolidate and 
develop the successes already won there, 

After deep reflection, I adopted the following plan: when 
the Army had been reorganized and order had been restored 
behind-the-lines, we must Strike out at the enemy on the 
northern front and so free our hands. Then, whilst maintaining 
ourselves in Northern Taurida, we must detach a section of 
our forces (the Caucasian Cossack regiments) and send them 
to the Kuban, relying on the support of the Cossacks of that 
area, and sweep the whole of the Kuban free of the Bolshevigs 
Later Still we must abandon Northern Taurida, leavin the 
defence of the isthmus to the 18 Army Corps, and s the 
Don troops to help those in the Kuban. 

Since we were pep pr a campaign to free the Cossack 
distritts from the Red yoke, the “Cossack Question” had to be 


defined. I thought it desirable to preserve a wide aut 
which could work through the exiting nihi v of loci 
Cossack administration; yet at the same time I felt that I 


tism. The Atamans and thei 
the troops at the front distruste cit Governments felt that 
i d 
= complete dependence on the — — 


92222 j em oe aoe a Prr o a o aa i 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 257 


therefore they did their utmost to eſſect a reconciliation with 
the Supreme Command. 
The Press, except for the official paper—the LH, 
Ressia—gave a very imperfect impression of the impottance 
our national Struggle, and the South Russian Government's 
int of view on internal and foreign questions. Quite often, 
Pether consciously or unconsciously, through the fault of 
32 editor or merely simple carelessness, or perhaps because of 
A incompetence of the censor, the Press published news- 
: A gra Ph or articles which produced the most unfortunate 
Pp apession abroad. 
aper with monarchist 1 the Rousskaia Pravda, 
nich a peared in Scbaftopol, published 2 series of articles 
r gly advocating pogroms. Admiral MacCully, the Ameti- 
fc ‘resentative, and Major Eticvant, who was representin 
can ce now instead of General Mangin (he was equally well 
fr ed towards us), came to me one after the other, each with 


| Ad 
e 


PCr hs a hwy 


— 
— 


é D 


E = NY G ee 


gn pore the censor and suspending the paper. 
i wer of the complicated political alen and the 
aderance of democratic tendencies in the western 
bei, on whom we were absolutely dependent, we had 
ay particularly circumspect. Emigrant Russian circles who 
to » hostile to us were carrying on a treacherous campai 
wei deceiving democratic Europe. They wished it to bo 
ht that we were not fighting for the National Cause 
r nationalist tendencies, and that not liberation but 
ion was our object. They made capital out of every 
ble event; the word “master” printed in large type in 
ny Appeal to the Russian people on the eve of the ohe 
jad raised a tempest in the Fress of the Left, Unfortunately, 
ach papers as the Rousshaia Pravda gave them many a pretext. 
Oo July sth, an interview which I had given to one of their 
appeared in the Velikaia Rossia; it read rather like 


i ion:— 


s” * 


-me = we vv 


thot 
but 


“Wy Are We Ficnurinc?” 


ge can be only one answer to this question (said General 
Ha We are fighting for freedom. On the other side of 


northern front despotism, oppression, and slavery reign 


yoIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


ve the most varied Pinion 
supreme. One 8 and such 4 regime; One May b. to th, 
op socialist, or even Marxist, and sj) Peal, d 
lican, pee et Republic is nothing but the * thes 
the pata tone sinister e which is send tf 
an unprece e. Even the so-called governing Class, the, Na 
into a declin nressed as much as the rent dae beet 
tariat, afc T regards it as a mystery—the veil has 
Euro mie 23 of Soviet Russia. Moscow js the hein t 
ore of the reaétion, for there live the tyrants who tear d 
nee tik beasts. As for ourselves, anyone who treat, * 
s ies must be either blind or dishonest, We are F 
ona r people from a bondage such as they have Reve 
to free ou before, even in the darkest epochs of theire i 
8 me Europe did not understand this, but it ae 
fhei Jul beginning fo understand what we rea 
he world-wide significance of ont Civil War I oue So 
* e in vain, European society, European democracy 
ag~ s to defend its cultural and Politics| 
Will be Forced to take pe who is drunk with Success, 
Possessions against an enem 


gee their 

t give people an rtunity to voice ir opinion 
free from the cheka : aad ove AnA of machine-guns! 
imprison ur bave dissolved the Constituent Nen un 
td fom ofa ae). of is memben: e 
> tati ble of voici 
will of the ‘People, But ar oS * = e te 
modicum order Be i 
it, meet together and freely People may, if they so desir 


fo the will ot the Ns ernment zubjected myself absolutely 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA 


339 


Q asked General Wrangel’s opinion on the Jew; i 
A recrudescence of animosity against a Question.) 


5 running very 
„ and is turning 


views nor accept the Soviet Power, 1 believe that anythin 


i ; g 
ding to lca to a pogrom, and all rOpapanda i l 
. is a misfortune for the State. ** ganda in this 


olutely undisciplined, In the morning they attack the 
— s, in the evening they pillage others. The Jewish Question 
‘s an age-old, miserable, cult problem; it can only be 


olv a 

N lgated by a Strong power relying on law and sy tted 
aro T force. In a land where anarchy and despotism reign 
f reme, where the inviolability of Person and property is 
P pled underfoot, the way is open for one part of the 
e we to perpetrate every kind of violence against 
Eder The revival of anti-Semitism amongst the people is 
an ps a sign of their loathing for Communism, with which 
they quite mistakenly identify all the Jews. The recrudescence 
of Bolshevist activity in any country in the world will bring 


“Russia AND Europe” 


lam longing for the end of the Civil War with all my soul, 
Every drop of Russian blood which is shed wings my heart. 
But the Struggle must go on until men's consciences awake 
tad they realize that they are fighting against themselves and 
icir liberty, and that they are committing a senseless a& of 
political suicide. Until there is a normal power established in 
no matter what its complexion so long as it is based 
0 those principles which centuries of human thought have 
tlloved—epality, respect for personal rights and for private 
Ee aad the inviolability of international engagements 
addons Arr either peace nor any amelioration of economic 
oas, No international treaty, however unstable, can be 


A 


y 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


ded nor any question definitely settled. On | 
1 — the selt-abnegation and the } abours ot’? 
tything hange 


4149 


ians in the Crimea who gave up eve 
tn ered of humanity and the distant Centres of Barton 
culture on this last strip of Russian territory, ei Roten 
Army in the Crimea Stands for a great liberating movement 
is a Holy War for freedom and justice. $i 


shevist success on the Polish front had cons; 
Fe er the position of the Soviet Goy Wend 
London. England was bringing strong pressute to beat on N 
Poles to induce them to sign the peace. Italy was also ine); the 
for an entente with the Soviets. France and America Acc 
remained faithful to their former policy, de 
The preliminary condition on which the French Gove 

ment insisted before it would enter into any Negotiations With 
the Bolshevists with a view to an alliance, Was that 
Bolshevists should recognize all the obligations of forme, 
Russian Governments. Lloyd George was ready to come ty 
terms even on this point. France therefore abstained fron, 
taking part in the negotiations, and the English Government 
sent a Note to the Soviets, advising them to conclude 29 
armistice with the Poles and refer the question of the Russo. 
Polish frontier to the Allies. 

Should this plan be adopted, the Polish troops were to 
withdraw at once to the line which the Peace Co erence had 
fixed a year previously, that is, the Brest-Litovsk line which 
had been fixed as the boundary of incontestably Polish territory. 
The Bolshevists were not to pass beyond a line fifty kilometres 
to the east of this. Should an armistice be arranged, England 
proposed to call a Peace Conference in London at the begin- 
ning of August, Besides Poland, Finland, Esthonia, Lethoniz, 
Lithuania, and Eastern Galicia were to take part, and all were 


their representatives for the Conference. 
M. Giers, who informed us of all this, telegraphed :— 


They want to extend this aris to W , and 
make him withdraw to the I&hmus of nin ron, 


pad tks y 7th I ingmucted M, Neratov to telegraph to M. 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA ast 


To demand the withdrawal of out troops to the Ighmus is to 
condemn the Army and the population to death by famine, for 
the peninsula cannot feed them. 
Ichitcherin answered Lloyd George’s armistice proposal 
by saying that he would reject English mediation bitai 
Poland and the Soviets or on the question of the Soviets? 


relations with the rebel Wrangel, to whom he could promise 
nothing but his lite should he capitulate. 

Force — E — s — the new Polish Coalition 
inet under the presidency of the peasant Vitos i 
Capi ya directly with — F epee 

] strove to hasten General Makhrov's departure for Poland 

every means in my power. At last, after a whole month of 

tiation, we obtained the consent of the Polish Govern- 

t to his appointment as our military representative at 

Warsi, and he set of for Constantinople on board an 
Am erican destroyer, 


the evening of the 8th I went back to Diankoy. The 
ne day M. Krivochein telephoned me: ewes 


A telegram has just come from M. Struve (he said). The 
Preach Government has consented to a de fafa recognition of 
the South Russian Government, It is a great political victory. 


Yes, it was indeed a great triumph for our foreign policy; 
1 vas the crow ning point of three months” work. 
. Giers had telegraphed on July 7th:— 


Strave begs to inform General Wrangel that M. Millerand 
summoned him to-day and told him that he would agree to 
recognize the Government of the Armed Forces of South 

Russia as a de falfo Government on the following conditions: 

1, That we recognize explicitly all the financial obligations 
of the old Russian Government which touch that part 
of Russia now occupied by our Armies. 

2. That we recognize the division of the land amongst the 
peasants which took place during the Revolution, and 
confirm the peasants in this land in individual ownership. 

3. That we promise to call a popular assembly elected on a 
democratic basis at the first suitable moment. 


* 


This declaration must be put in the form of a request for 
% fede recognition addressed to M. Millerand, President of 
cil of the French Republic, 

R 


A A MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
ts s 

trure Stroagly advocates the immedia:. 

M. Millecnd’s offer, because de fafo recognition py Piang, 

be an immense Step forward in the consolidari on op cg 


j ition, and will greatly facilitate f oy 
—— the entire Russian Debt, 20d Pen, 


that part of it which applies to the territory whic) Te 
We 


and of Sie whole Russian State ; he has agreed to thi teal 8 


tion. M. Millerand's communication is &rictiy confdent 


Two days later, on July ↄthraaznd, Giers telegraphed. 
Struve begs to inform General Wrangel of the 


ed in the official newspaper, of President X deu, . 
peed to the Chamber of Depts on July 20th tera 
Let me describe the position of General Wrap, el whe 
Struggling so bravely and successfully against Bo — à 
the and Taurida; at the moment, circ th 
favouring him, A real de fafo Government has been set ap = 
has won thé support and sympathies of the da 65 
enforcing the agrarian reform of dividing the land 
the ts; furthermore, at this very moment it is draf 
as for calling a popular representative assembly, N ng 
this de falfo Government asks for recognition, it is quite undes 
Stood that a preliminary condition will be its unanimous and 
responsible declaration that it accepts all the obligations con- 
tracted by previous Russian Governments with foreign Stute: 


I instructed Prince Troubetzkoy to telegraph to Struve: 


Authorize Giers to make the 5 g declaration to M. 
Millerand in the form that you consider best. It is desirable to 
emphasize that whilst we, as upholders of the national ides 

the traditions of the Russian State, accept all the obligations 
of former Russian Governments, we expect that out corre- 

N * fon: ‘The Prikaze i 

the a tion: ze concerning 
the Land, —— by the Commander-in-Chief on May 23th, 
gives the land back to the peasants in full ownership—that is 
to say, we have already complied with one of the conditions in 
advance, Furthermore, the Commandesin-Chief authorizes you 
to say that, in full accordance with his earlier declarations, 
he considers his principal task to be the creation of a situation 
which will make it possible for the people to voice theit 
opinion freely on the essential problems of the form of govern 
ment which is to be established as soon as circumstances 


- =e SETE =e n —_, = 


| 


D Eh DPPN 


W TT A Tne U T ear 


IN NORTHERN TA 43 

permit. With this aim in view, the Prikaze of July ich has 
already put local administration into the hands of the distriét 
Zemstvos which are eleéted on a democratic basis. 

Please convey to M. Millerand the Commander'in-Chief's 
sincere gratitude for his friendly references to us. The su port 
which the French Government is giving the National Cause 
in Russia in these difficult times is of a piece with the tradi- 
tional friendship of the two Allied Powers, and undoubtedly 
te- shes their close union for the future, based as it is on 
their mutual interests and political airns. 

Meanwhile the enemy were still reinforcing their eſſectives 
nd sending new units to our front from ern Russia, 
stern Siberia, Caucasia, and the Polish front. On the 
em section of our front the enemy’s forces numbered 
er en infantry and six cavalry divisions—thirty-five thousand 
onets and ten thousand sabres in all. The total number of 
a in the enemy’s Army had grown to two hundred and 
fifty to three hundred thousand (counting both those at the 
t and behind-the-lines). I ordered my troops to attack 
ibe Reds and thus prevent them from completing their con- 
eration and resuming the initiative, From July rath to Jul 


Si f ghting had been in progress all ang the front, wit 
saying SU 


ccess. It was not until the 18th that we definitely 
ned the upper hand; by the zoth the enemy were already in 
retreat, and we had taken more than five thousand prisoners, 


hiny big guns, one hundred and fifty machine-guns, four 


trains, and quantities of war material. 
On July 22nd the following convention was solemnly 
een ourselves and the Atamans of the Don, Terek, 


Kahan, and Astrakhan :— 


In view of their joint undertaking to free Russia from the 
yoke of Bolshevism, the Regent and Commander-in-Chief 
of the Armed Forces of South Russia and the Atamans and 
Governments of the Don, Kuban, Terek, and Astrakhan 
have unanimously concluded the following convention, as an 
elaboration of their agreement of April 15th of this year :— 

1. Complete independence in home affairs and administra- 
tion is guaranteed to the States of the Don, Kuban, Terek, 
and Astrakhan. 

. The Presidents of the Governments of the Don, Kuban, 
Terek, and Astrakhan, or their deputies, shall sit in the 
Regent’s Ministerial Council and have the right to vote 
on all questions, 


MEMOIRS OP GENERAL WRANGEL 


Commuander-in-Chief shall assume 
á — all the armed forces of the Don, Kuban? 


— . T Pen 
Agra litary operations and all gues: erek 
— The States of the Don, Naben ers 


7 shall order a mobilization of Sre a 


i r alread been mobilized on the f 
Peya 8 Armed Forces of South — yoo 
— Lin Chief shall 3 è 
rything necessary for the re-equipment of 
4 3 of South Russia in their Struggle ha des 
Bolshevists shall, upon an order ſrom the Co 
in-Chief, be supplied by the territories gcc: edb 
Armed Forces and the States of the Don, Ky, b 
and Astrakhan—the share expected from ea ch wig 
settled in advance. . 
s. The administration of the railways and the ae 


telegraph lines shall be in the hands of the 
in-Chiek: Commande 


x ments and negotiations with fore G 

: er political and economic questions shall ee 
within the province of the Regent and Commanderin. 
Chief. In cases where such pepetiations affect the interes, 
of one of the four Cossack States, the Regent and 
Commander-in-Chief shall first consult with the Ataman 
of that State. 

7. A tarif and a common indirect tax shall be established 
All barriers and visits by Customs officials are abolished 
between the parties to this convention. 

8. One curtency only shall be in circulation throughout the 
territories of the contracting parties. The Regent and 
Commander-in-Chief shall exercise the right of issuing it. 
The elaboration of the monetary system and the division 
of the money as it is minted are reserved for a later con- 

vention, The standard for the new currency is to be 
settled by the Regent's Ministerial Council with which 
it is compulsory that representatives of the States of the 
Don, Kuban, Terek, and Astrakhan shall 

hh e Regent and Commander-in-Chief shall ratify the 


Teh d territories of the States of the Don, Kuban, 


Put before the Cossack Renee this convention shall be 


x 


the 
the 
th 


Mmediate] 5 all come into force 
Civil War is define! is to remain in force until the 


r ad a a ee es Se 


7? 2 


that 
between the Poles and the Bolshevists would come to nothing. 
The Soviet Powers kept putting off the conclusion of the 
negotiations on all manner of pretexts, apparently wishing to 
time for the Red troops who were advancing victoriously, 
hat they could defeat their enemy at leisure. It is true that 


ord George was still making desperate efforts to atrange a 
compromise with the Soviets, but even he seemed to realize 
the hopelessness of his attempts. In one of his speeches in 
House of Commons he declared that England had done 
utmost to prevent “the need for resorting to extreme 
arising”. 
en slicy was unchanged. France was | eee to 
rt Poland by every means in her power, and was sending 
oP itary instructots, arms, and ammunition. 
af? for America, she had squarely refused to enter into any 
tiations whatsoever with the Bolshevists. 
a day when 2 would open her eyes and realize 
he world danger of the Red International seemed to be 


ching. 
Ae had Woocher telegram from M. Giers on July zznd- 
augus 4th. He wrote:— 

In view of the urgency of the situation and the turn which 


the armistice question has taken, General Miller t has begun 
pegotiations with the French military authorities, and will 


report the results directly to you. 
Grers. 
Te was clear that the rupture was complete, and that hence- 
forth all questions would have to be settled by force of arms 
and not by diplomatic Notes. 
General Chatilov and I were sitting on the terrace of the 
one clear, peaceful evening; the sunset was already 
and all the colours of the rainbow were mirrored in 


the sea. As twilight crept upon the town, the street - lamps 


"We had rrap thi for ho hangin 

e had often sat upon this terrace for hours, exchangi 
ideas and discussing the future, or talking of the past. But — 
seldom, if ever, revealed our most intimate thoughts to one 


ln these difficult days, when it seemed that there was no 
Our military representative in Paris. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


me | d to spare one an > 
tly agree Other 
way crs ihe 1 acts of the situ in 
We et uestions. It was only when we spoke of the pt of 
— — confessed the doubts and menta] anpuis wh; 
wes now we had kept zealously hidden in the very deprhy c 


our beings. = CARNS 

rticular evening we ta inti te 
r Ke usual. All the circumstances combined t, — 
us in the mood for intimate outpourings—the serene lovee 
ness of the dying day, the temporary lull after Month, = 
bloody warfare, and the rift which seemed to be o ening in 


the black clouds which had enveloped our ext situation 


on all sides. ; . 40 

“Yes,” mused Chatilov pensively, | you and I 
sufficiently appreciate the miracle in which we have been — 
onlookers and actors. It is now three months since We Came 
here. You believed that your duty called you here to the 
Army; I came because I could not leave you. I do Not know 
if you thought that success was sible; I know ] considered 
that everything was absolutely lost. It is only three Months 


ago. .. .” He paused, 
Ves an immense amount of work has been done in that 


time, he continued, and it has not been done in vain- 
whatever the future may hold for us, 
national flag which was trailed in the dust at Novorossiisk, 
has now been redeemed, and this heroic struggle will fail, 
if indeed it does fail, in a blaze of beauty. 

“And yet the failure of our struggle is no longer a foregone 
conclusion. Jus as, foree months ago, I was convinced that 
Our cause was lost, to-day I am e convinced that we shall 
succeed. The Army has schueved i i 
1s small in numbers, its spirit has never been stronger. I do not 
doubt the success of the Kuban campaign the Atmy will 
p crease its numerical Strength in this area as well as in the 
Don. The population is on our side now; they have faith in 
the new régime, and realize that jt is fighting to free Russia 


SL aT Ak BFA EH 


IN NORTHERN TAURIDA u7 
plished. Three months ago the Army had been driven down 
to the sca, and had been on the point of extinction on the 
last Strip of native soil; the people of Russia had disowned it, 
secing it only as an oppressor, not as a liberator. Europe had 
turned her back on us, and had been ready to regard the 
ysurpers who had seized Russia as a Power representing the 

Russian people. The end had seemed imminent and inevitable 

but behold! our . linet zone forward and tnumphed, 

their souls purged by suffering; they had marched on, spreading 
order and a spirit of lawfulness wherever they went. The new 

ime had the confidence of the poopie; its face had been 
yaveiled for all to sec. The world which had been on the 

int of forgetting us was already beginning to understand 
us, and the Struggle of a handful of Russian patriots was 
decoming an important factor in international politics. Yes, 
dus was all true enough, but how smal] was this scrap of free 

Russia compared with the vast Russian territories in the 

wer of the Reds! How poverty-stricken we seemed com- 
d with those who had pilfered our country of all its gteat 

Leuch! How uncqual were the two parties in tettitory, 

arength, and resources! Our ranks gtew thinner daily ; 

tehind-the-lines were crowds of wounded; our best and moe 

‘enced officers were out of action, and there were none 
to take their place. Our weapons were wearing out, and our 
gock of ammunition was dwindling; our technical engines of 
war were becoming useless, and without them we were 

less. Buy more? We had not the necessary means at 
out disposal. Our economic position was gtowing more and 
more Gut Had we the strength to hold out until help 
should come? And, another thing, was help coming? Would 
not those who were willing to send it demand too high 
1 price in return? For we could not expect any entirely 
diusterested help, 

It would be useless to look for high moral considerations 
behind Europe’s policy, for it was inspired solely by a desire 
for gain. I have my aes to hand. Only a few days before 
this, had Jet it be known that, to Stop contraband of war 
from smuggled into the Black Sea ports, I had ordered 
wur to be laid at the entrance to the Soviet harbours. The 
es of the Allied Fleets, both English and French, 
tar against this measure, and had she 5a to me 

Was superfluous, because they themselves had forbidden 


$ OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


he Soviet ports. Four days later, th 
rine Department intercepted 


vi 
t seemed, at the request of the Co 


(its mame was indeci herable) ks 
tons of com * 


G — Se sth with four thousan | 
enoa k with drugs, apparatus for shipment he 
+ and M. 


(Signed) Rano, 

i 

narantee had we that those who needed 
Mere; time would not abandon us at the critical US ay thi 
$ je to become strong enough to be e 


ad we the tin À e 
continue the struggle with only our own forces, if need 10 
} 


when this moment came? 
The future was Still uncertain, and it was better no, . 


investigate it too closely; we had no choice—we had 
on fighting as long as we had the strength. ad to po 


S SB@ABBRSSAB 


IN THE KUBAN 


atations for the projected campaign in the Kuban 
— l made. On July 29th the embar co 


tion of the troops 
was tO begin simultaneously in Feodossia and Kertch. At 
n on August 


ist the invading detachment were to disem- 
rk near the village of Primorsko-Akhtarskaia, and leaving 
— troops to cover them on the north, were to advance 
? idly on Ekaterinodar. They were to rally the rebels on 
— way and stir up the Cossacks of the surrounding country- 


dde is detachment numbered about four thousand five 
undred bayonets and sabres, onc hundred and thirty machine- 
h s, twenty-six big guns, some armoured cars, and eight 
gue janes. A separate detachment of five hundred bayonets 
2 p hill battery of two guns had been ordered to make a 


demonstration, landing near Anapa, ànd to co-operate with 
the rebels of this area, 


Our agents informed us that the Cossacks were everywhere 
hostile to the Soviet Power. We had received the following 
formation 8 the enemy: their principal forces 
were in the area lying between Novorissiisk and the Tamana 
peninsula. From the north of this peninsula to Yeisk the 
coat was guarded only by very small detachments. If the 
snormous body of rebels be taken into account, our numerical 
aength was Still a little inferior to the enemy’s. All the 
circumstances led us to hope that, given secrecy and speed, we 
would be able to carry out our disembarkation without much 

sition, Then afterwards our troops would advance on 
to their native soil on which dwelt a sympathetic population, 
nllying numerous detachments of rebels as they went; thus 
a 


ould seize Ekaterinodar, the heart and centre of the 
and sw: 


the Reds of the north right off Kubanian 
tmtory before the Red Command had had time to concen- 
* their very considerable forces. 
€ Kuban once occupied, I intended, as I have already 
to transfer the whole Don Army 
249 


Corps to Taman and 


WRANGEL 
OF GENERAL 
MEMOIRS 


I had made 
Perecko . Once ; s Sure of 
base in 
t ion. 


‘neading detachment had been wen 
en lagay nobody cse could bave taken it. He keg 
to General Ulagay ; the Cossacks, and one could “raj 

ee sae ki the Cossacks, and win them over to his Side, 
é alarm”, Kit 


follow from that. Ulagay wa 
Everything, it 5 well able to cope with 


ase s 
withdraw our troop 


General d his chief-of- staff a general 
1 the cam reg sine the problem to them, and 
ou 


the ditecting of the troops on the northem 
— Se ve very little attention to the execution of the 
I 


. This was a t mistake, as the future was not 
eee I 3 it by July 29th when I 
tion of the troops, 


an 

lected at random, with no bond 
of union whatsoever between them, This was inevitably a 
heavy burden for the troops. 

The plan for the disembarkation in the Kuban had not 
been informed fee Ataman of the Kuban had heard of it 
8 the members of his Government and tha 

8 that we were “going to the Kuban” was 
8 ent everyw behind · the · lines and even at the front. 

—— b believe the tumours that the General Staf 

Hera Tano the eſſect that the disembarkation would take 
48@0rop, to support Col Nazarov’s detachment. 
ber of Kubanian refugees were trailing 


„ 


EO E 


- & SNe . BR ML 2 OFS) LE on he AE 


ie Mt ere en eT pe 


lace, the rabble was indescribable. he ing to ao 
Erich some young pupils from the military schools 
fainted for lack of air. Sixteen thousand men and four thousand 
five hundred horses were embarked, although the troo 
qumbered only five thousand bayonets and sabres. All the — 
were members of behind - che · lite organizations or tefugees. 
It was [00 late by then to make any changes. I went the 
round of the ships and 22 to the troops; then I sent for their 
er and gave him full instructions once more, 
“The detachment base is the Kuban,” I told him. “Do not 
looking back for your ships, and, above everything, avoid 
gattering yout troops. Only a brisk advance can bring us 
success 5 the igote delay, and you will be lost.“ 
few days before I had gone to Feodossia, some of our 
s had landed there under the leadership of General 
ov; they had retreated to Odessa in Poland during the 
inter of 1920 and had been interned there, After long months 
af negotiation, they had been sent to the Crimea by way of 
ja. They had been living under the most terrible 
tions in Poland. They had been confined to small camps, 
bad lacked suitable clothing, and had been almost without food. 
Į had inspected the troops which were about to embark, 
vent to see the newly arrived “Bredovians”. They were a 
sotty sight—tattered, barefooted, and some of them dressed 
only in filthy rags. After they had rested and been 


slong in the wake of the . 


nforce the 2nd Army Corps. | 

During the last days of July we received many intimations 
shot the Red forces were concentrating on the right bank of 
the Dnieper. From day to day we had to be ready for a con- 
gderable detachment of Reds, should they attempt to force 
the lower reaches of the Dnieper. The information we had 
metived from our agents and the wireless messages we had 
istercepted Jed us to oo Fee that the principal blow would 
de ruck at the Betislavl area (opposite Kahovka) by three 
orfour divisions. Acting on this information; I gave instructions 
to Generals Koutepov and Slachtchov. 

On July 25th the Reds landed near Malaia Kahovka under 
cover of artillery fire from the right bank of the Dnieper, 
vhich dominates the sandy plain on the left bank. Immediately 
they began to construct a pontoon-bridge. Simultaneously, 


— 


25: MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


another Red detachment crossed the river under 
artillery near the Korsunsky monastery and Ane Of th. 
midday they had finished the pontoon-bridge ion 
evening they occupied Bolchaia Kahovka with a design 
of two thousand men and several Jight batteries. ii 

Our units kept the enemy in check stubbornly bu 
were decimated by the artillery from the right ink’. d they 
by forces considerably larger than their own, so that the faced 
forced to abandon the counter- offensive. ey were 

According to the report of the commander of the diyi 
which had fought in this area, he had lost not less chan aon 
his contingent ; he wrote that “the fighting-power of the ti alf 
had been very greatly reduced“. OOP; 

On July 26th the Reds continued their offensive, but thi 
time they mer with a repulse. me 5 

On July 27th the fighting was still in poets. The enemy 
completed the passage of the river near Kahovka, and trend 

orted their heavy artillery and cavalry units across to th 
eft bank, deploying their torces along a wide front, They then 
launched an offensive in the south, Striving to turn oy, 
cavalry’s flanks. 

On July 28th General Slachtchov’s Army Corps took up 
a fortified position from which it could defend the princip] 
route, the Perekop road; simultaneously, we managed to con- 
centrate our . so that they might strike a blow at the 
enemy’s left wing. 

Whilst the cavalry and the units of the znd Army Corps 
were preparing to strike a blow at the Reds on the left bank 
of the Dnieper, the situation became threatening on the front 
where the ist Army Corps was stationed. The Reds had 
concentrated the 2nd Cavalry Army, and the 18t, 3rd, and 
46th divisions of light infantry, reinforced with the Com- 
munis units and a brigade of pupils from the Red aa 
schools, and were making desperate efforts to break throug 
our front. 

Time and again our gallant ist Army Corps repulsed the 
Red attacks, but our losses were enormous, especially amongst 
the officers. In these circumstances, it became absolut 
necessary to finish with the Red group which had crossed the 
Dnieper as soon as possible, and thus leave the ca 
to go to the assistance of the 1s Army Corps, which was 


wasting its strength in an unequal fight. 


IN THE KUBAN 

At dawn on July zoth, General Barbovitch’s cavalry units 
advanced against the enemy’s rearguard, which had discovered 
our cavalry movements and hegas to retreat all along the 
front, pursued by our infantry. General Barbovitch overtook 
a retreating Lettish brigade, 


Our cavalry rushed upon the 
enemy, absolutely defeated them, and took two sand 
soners and three guns complete with 


ammunition wagons, 

Gur in spite of gallant General Barbovitch's profitable venture, 

ich had inflicted this severe defeat on the enemy, General 

sjachtchov could not win a decisive success. He had scattered 

che units of his Army Corps, and so could not make usé of any 

of out cavalry’s success; indeed, he gave the enemy time to 
ver themselves. ; 

In the meantime the rst Army Corps continued to repulse 

attacks of the Reds, shedding near every dro 
pe feror tacks of the g neatly every drop of 

The fighting which continued throughout the day of 
ply 318 ended in a fresh failure, Our units suffered heavy 
— the enemy put up a stubborn Opposition; the Letts 

t especially tenaciously, The enemy worked relentlessly 
reinforce their position. 

At last, on the 18 Army Corps’ front, they seemed to be 
osing their breath. Their attacks grew visibly weaker. From 
de moming of August 1S a calm began to settle over the 

part of the front. General Koutepov was optimistic 
— the future. In the evening a telegram came to say that 
our troops had succeeded in landing near the et of 


though a rumour of the raid on the Kuban had mo& 
emainly leaked through to the enem owing to the indiscretion 
of the Kubanians in charge, the Red Command were ignorant 
of the exact landing-place, and the raid had been accomplished 
sithout any losses. 

On the evening of August and General Slachtchoy tele- 
graphed that he would be forced to give up his attacks on the 
memy’s fortified position. The head of the Kahovka bridge 
wis in the hands of the enemy, and this put a considerable 
oumber of our out of action, besides constituting a 
menace to our left fank on our most important route—the 
Patkop road, Nevertheless, the enemy had not been able to 


8 victory. Northern Taurida remained in our 


and the units which had been detached from our 


French Co ‘ 


ijg MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


main army had carried our the fr 
they had landed, and marched ra i 


| idly 
territory. pidy on to 


* — , 
petan them both into the hands of General K Corps 
u * 


h Cc W as or. 


3 tenacity į 
pursuit of his ends. He had won the friendshj a m the 
U 


f Officers 


astructor for th 
€ 


counsellor at our Embassy in Paris, declared hig Wh. 
recognition of the South Russian Government. Ja fc 
Q 
Ang Pants, 10 
To the Chargé d. Affaires. der Wa, 
Str, 
In a letter of August 8th you asked me if I did not consider 


it opportune to give effect to the Statements I made 

the "subjea of the de falfa recognition of the South dus 
Government. You ask me to take into consideration, — 
one hand the consolidation of the internal Government and 
General Wrangel's military successes, and on the other the 
assurances contained in your letter of August 3rd, 

You also point out the advantage of our having a diplomatic 
agent at Sebastopol, who will be able to exercise effeétive moral 
influence at least by reason of his personal authority. 

I have the honour to inform you that the Government of the 
Republic has decided to accord de fafa recognition to the 
Government of South Russia, and will send a diplomatic agent 
to Sebastopol as you suggest, at the same time notifying the 
Allied and Associated Governments of its decision. 

I must add that I think it advantageous that this decision 
should receive as much publicity as possible. 

Yours faithfully, 


To M. Basixy, 
Russian Chargé d Affaires. 


On August F pe I had telegraphed to the President of the 


> -e 


za - 


Hrs Excatumncy M. MILLERAND, PAESIDENT or THE 


Councit, MINISTER or FOREIGN Arrams, Pants 


In view of the Republican Government's decision to 
nize the South Russian Government, J beg to offer you my 


GENERAL WRANGEL. 


A few days later, the American Government’s Note settin 
forth the views of the United States on the Russian and Polish 

gestions, came to our notice. Giers communicated it to us 
ig several telegrams :— 


The American Government has published a Note elucidatin 
its point of view on the Russian and Polish Questions. Polish 
territory is not to be touched. America is sympathetic towards 
the Powers’ negotiations for an armistice between Poland and 
the Soviets, but opposes the convocation of a general Confer- 
ence which would probably finish by recognizing the Bol- 
shevists and the partition of Russia, America has pronounced 
in favour of the unity of Russia, and wants the settlement of 
sl] questions relating to the sovercignty of the territories of 
the old Russian Empire to be Postponed. Therefore she has 
already refused to recognize the independence of the States 
which have been set up on the frontier, with the one exception 
of Armenia. She states that the frontiers of Armenia were 
definitely fixed with the co-operation and consent of Russia. 
The same co-operation is necessary to deal with the Near 
Eastern Question. The United States will recognize neither 
the Soviet Government, which is the very negation of all 
International Law, nor the principles of any of those nations 
which are Striving for world-revolution by means of the Third 
International. 
The American Note has been very well received here. It 
teleases France from her painful position of political isolation, 
gives her solid moral support in her anti-Bolshevist policy, 
which is crippling Lloyd George’s stubborn desire to come to 
la understa ine with the Soviets. The Cabinet here in Paris 
tus taken advantage of America’s Note to declare openly, in a 


-F MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
blished to-day, its complete agreement with 
5 a national — which America — a dema, 
ian Note. Tre" in 
8 of these principles by the South . 
Government that led France to accord it recogritien Silan 
essential point for us to notice in America's action x the ste 
thar the United States are upholding the Principle of dhe fae 
torial integtity of Russia. terri. 

I instructed M. Struve to see that our Ambassad 
Washington conveyed to the American Government ig 
sincere gratitude for the support it had given ys t 
declaration. 

The situation on the Polish front seemed hopeless. 
Red Army had continued its ad vance, and Was now approach. 
ing Warsaw. The front was within fifty kilometres 
Capital, which was being evacuated with all speed. Simul 
taneously, under the 3 2 pecans a huge number of 
volunteers from all classes of the Population were; ining the 
Army, General Weygand, who had just reached Pol 
doing his utmost to reorganize the Polish Army with the 
of the French Staff officers he had brought With him, The 

y was being regrouped with the object of launching an 
offensive at the first possible moment and of Wiesting the 
initiative from the enemy. ) 

The Kuban operation was progressin favourably, Genera 
Ulagay’s units had absolute y defeated the Red Caucasian 
cavalry division and had taken many 


help 


e fav n, our latest success in the 
feld of forei relations, and the gtadual establishment of 
normal order in the country, all strengthened the people’s 
confidence in us as th 


the new rulers. Things began to settle 
down; the economic situation alone sh i 


eavy burden on the country. Our or 
expenses Were more direct and indi 
taxation; but our military oe 150 i 


* „ 2 „ — A 


8 


D waa Sas SS ee 


IN THE KUBAN n 
obtain a loan at home or abroad, swallowed up the last 
remnants of our fund of foreign securities, 

In case the operations which were in progress in the Kuban 
should make the northern seétion of our front an independent 
theatre of war, I decided to amalgamate the troops of the 
1a and znd Army Corps and the Cavalry Corps and call 
them the 1st Army, putting General Koutepoy at their head. 
I gave the command of the yar Army Cops to General 
pissarev, and put General Vitkovsky at the head of the and 
Army Corps instead of General Slachtchay. 

General Slachtchov, who had long been a slave to drink 
and drugs, had now become com letely unhinged as a result, 
On August sth he arrived in Sebastopol, He was a terrible 
acle. His face was deadly pale and his mouth never ceased 
ro tremble, while tears streamed from his cyes. He sent me a 
dispatch which was abundant proof that I was dealing with 
man iñ the throes of mental sickness, 
had difficulty in calming him, I was as friendly as I could 
be, and tried to persuade him how necess it was that he 
should take care of himself. I assured him once he had 
uken a rest and was better, he would again be able to serve 
gar cause. I promised to do all I could to prevent his departure 
from being interpreted as a dismissal, 

pore y Slachtchov scemed touched beyond words. He 
thanked me in a trembling voice, broken by tears, I could not 
look at him without feeling the deepest ity. 

That same day he and his wife paid a visit to my wife, 
The next day we returned their visit, Slachtchov was li in 
atthe Station in a railway-carriage. Incredible disorder rei — 
in his com ent. The table was covered with bottles, and 
dishes of bors d e; on the bunks were clothes, pla ing- 
cards, and weapons, all yig ont anyhow. Amidst al this 
confusion was Slachtchov, in a fantastic white dol 

d and be-furred. He was surrounded by all kinds of 
ids; he had a crane there, and also a raven, a swallow, and 


Lk . « they were hopping about on the table and the 
= fluttering round, and perching on their master’s head 


| insisted on General Slachtchoy undergoing a medical 
en. The doctors e an acute — of neuras- 
which necessitated strié treatment obtainable only in a 
They advised Slachtchov to go abroad and take 

S 


258 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


care of himself, but al! attempts to ersuade hj 
were in vain. He decided to settle — in Tahir 0 Bo away 

The regrouping of the Polish forces had been com 
and waves of obstinate fighting rolled up to the ye Pleteg, 
of Warsaw. On some seétions of the front the Pole. 
. the Bolshevists braten. i * Wete 

General Koutepov's front, fierce fi hting ha 
again on August W pitches begun 

In the meantime, on August 5th, our units in the Kuban 
occupied several villages on the Ekaterinodar toad, but ha 
gone no farther. The latest news of the enemy we had receiy d 
mentioned a concentration of Red forces, New units whe 
making their appearance on General Ula ay’s front. It 
obvious that the enemy had begun to collect their forces 
attack our invading detachment. There was no time to be log: 
every day we wasted gave the cnem another day in Which to 
bring up fresh troops. Yet General Ulagay did not gtr pa 
August 6th, 7th, or 8th. 

eneral Siegel, Chief of the fortified arca at Kertch, ned 
that our scouts in the Taman peninsula had sent wont the 
enemy were retreating, He had ordered a detachment, hastily 
formed from the reserve units and those behind-thedines at 
Kertch, to land in Taman. 

On the morning of the roth I left for Kertch. The unfor- 
giveable delay in the movements of General Ulagay’s units 
was alarming mc, and i Maga was tacked with anxious 
thoughts. At Vladislavovka Station General Chatiloy got 
into my compartment. His gloomy expression warned me 
immediately that he was bringing bad news, Silently he handed 
me a telegram from General Ulagay. It said that the situation 

ome serious, for fresh enemy units had come up, 

and the enemy now een an overwhelming numerical 
superiority. Therefore he begged that ships might be sent 
as soon as possible to the hamlet of Akhtarsky to pick up the 
expeditionary force, My presentiment had not been a false one. 
The short sentences of the radiogram did not give a complete 
picture of what had happened, but it was obvious that ev 
operation we had undertaken had failed. The indispensable 
condition of success—unexpeétedness—was already lost. The 
initiative had been per fall from our hands, and the 
chief of the detachment had lost all faith in the possibility of 
success, 


iL» 


up against him from Taman, i i 
the Tamanan peninsula, our position would still be 
e lacked the necessary troops for 


e good. Unfortunately * 
fairly £ our hold on the peninsula until General Ulagay’s 


n 

—— should arrive. General Siege! had succeeded in getting 
ogether a mixed company and about one hundred plastouncs * 
tet a one gun at Kertch. But these troops were deficient 
ey and quailty. and did not constitute a real force. 
rhe intensive fighting which was stil] in progress on the 
did not permit of the transfer of a single man 

from there. . 
rhe reper 0 August ith I yo to the village of 
anskaia, where I was present at the singin of the Te 
— Į also addressed a public meeting. Th 3 
most empl - 
f absolute terror; they had no faith in our success, and 


pate n the 
ea iready ten versts to the east of the village, and the enemy 
gett 

On my ke. 
Babiev, the gallant commander of the ict Kuban 
Cossack He reported that he had just won a fairly 
pig success near the villages of Brynkovskaia and Olghinskaia. 
new about the telegram which General Ulagay had sent 


He > 
the previ 
ot now a favourable one, and he saw no reason why 
“e should give up the operation which we had begun. His 
ines of communication with General Ulagay had been cut 
hat was why he had sent this report Straight to me, 
I sent General Babiev’s telegram on to General Ulagay b 
eroplane, adding a word of my own to the effect ony ed 
ba peara 0 o on ee the 9 at the same 
he possibility of transferring our base 
u Taman. I asked him for a detailed communiqué on the 
On the morning of the 12th I received an 
nth other telegram 
oe Ulagay. The situation had changed sli ghtly and 
onger necessary to send the ships. The telegram 


t Cossack infantry. —TRansLaTor. 


260 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


reassured me only very slightly. The 
e of arrangements was clear umandes» 
head altogether. That evening the hina’ be had sh 
detailed report on the situation for which Tiatned with hig 
In spite of the words he himself had ai asked, * the 
commanders of the units—“Only an ener et dressed to 
bring us success. The Kuban is our base. è 1 Offensive we 
boats”—General Ulagay unfortunately encumbe, bumt on 
with enormous rearguard impedimenta, Great ed hi a 
arms, ammunition, and provisions had been left at l Tres of 
stage, near the village of Primorsko-Akhtarsky The adding. 
and the soldiers’ families who had followed the A reſages 
Kuban had also remained there. Thus, even whit t0 the 
advanced, our units were compelled to look back all x they 
We received information that the Reds were Heine + timig, 
their forces; General Ulagay feared for his base and — 
vacillate; General Babiev and others urged an ime 
march on Ekaterinodar, for, according to some fugitive . 
was almost empty of Red troops, who had left in a panic fe 
Ulagay would not come to any decision on August 6th or wth. 
On the night of the roth General Ulagay gave the Order 
retreat, and simultaneously sent a telegram asking that the 
ships should be sent after all. 
eanwhile, on August gth, General Babiev had struck ! 
heavy blow at the enemy and taken one thousand prisoners and 


many machine-guns, 
On the 10th and r1th the Reds attacked out expeditionary 
force, but met with no success. 
Our units had followed up their advance in Taman. I had 
sent them the detachment which had landed at Anapa in the 


south at the same time as General Ulagay’s troops; it had 
been attempting to win over the Greens who were 

in this area. The hopes that we had entertained of the Greens 
had not been fulfilled. The new detachment had been attacked 


by the Reds and driven down to the sea, where they wert 
holding out only with the greatest difficulty, In spite of theit 
heavy losses, the pupils of the military schools who composed 
it had cut a brave figure. 

On August 13th we were still occupying several villages 1 
Taman. But our advance began to meet with an ever mort 
ous resistance. The enemy had driven back 


vigor 
Ulagay’s units and so released some troops from the Taman 


= oe eee — 
s +i 
— n — Bre Here Oe 


IN THE KUBAN 261 
area; ayer now hastening to re-establish their position 
this t. 
fon the Polish front the situation had changed radically. 
The Polish troops had passed to the offensive and inflicted a 
crushing defeat on the Reds. In the area between Narev and 
she German frontier many tens of thousands of Soviet 
soldiers had laid down their arms, whilst tens of thousands 
more had crossed the German frontier and been disarmed. 
e Bolshevist Armies were in retreat all along the front, and 
ne Poles were pursuing them. Every day the Polish victory 
took on greater and even greater dimensions. The Strategic 
uation changed with kaleidoscopic rapidity. 
“On August gth-22nd M. Maklakoy telegraphed :— 

1 have spoken to M. Palcologuc. The Bolshevict attack 
having been crushed, Poland is about to conclude the peace; 
the Great Powers are to fix the frontiers on ethnographical 
Ines. Paléologue realizes how necessary it is that you should 
have speedy help. Everything possible will be done. 


‘onature of peace by Poland would make our position 
ar more 3 The failure of the Kuban 1 — 
dus of our last hope of finding a way of continuin 
gruggie on neighbouring Russian territory. Abandon 
ae fare as we NOW Were, we would inevitably perish sooner 
ger. But J did not give up all hope that France who had 
* recognized us and had therefore taken up a very pro- 
r attitude towards the Soviet Power, would not leave 
Maklakov’s telegram Strengthened my hope. 
since it was apparent that France might waver, we had to 
mintin her belief in the strength of our position. The news 
the forced abandonment of the Kuban would have produced 
5 pat unfavourable impression abroad at such a 
noment, therefore it had to be hushed up. 
| intraéted M. Struve to send the chief of the French 
Mission a memorandum with the necessary explanations, At 
te ame time Neratov telegraphed to Maklakov:— 


By order of the Commander-in-Chief, Struve has sent the 
. the French Military Mission the following memo- 


General Wrangel wishes to submit to the French Govern- 


neat and High the following observations on the 
Meal military situation: Poland’s great success in her fight 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEy 


ed Army makes it possible, for the f. 
— pe war, a strike a decisive blow at dr n d. 
— by means of concerted action by the Polish er pvi 
Armies under the supreme direction of the French High Sian 
mand, This would ensure the general tranquillity — Com. 

e of the whole world. The conclusion of as 4 tocia 
ahr the Poles and the Bolshevists will leave the N 
Still open, and will not wipe out the Bolshevig danger, “Qing 

These considerations have led the Commander inch; * 

put before the French Government and High Com d to 
toblem of the establishment of one antl-Bolsheyig Fron 
P ion with the Poles and under the general dire, in 
of the French High Command. In such an eventuality — 
Strategical plans will have to undergo some modification, per 
the centre of operations will have to be shifted to the Ukraine 
The Commander-in-Chief does not consider it advisable ex 
approval 
co-operation of the French Government, But the — Ai 
the t demands a rapid decision and Its immediate ezeo. 
tion. In General Ulagay’s Army, in addition to the effettives 
who are more or less adequately armed and equipped, there 
are nearly five thousand soldiers who lack the great essential 
rifles. Under such conditions as these, the Commander. in- Chief 
has to carry out a complex and difficult strategical operation, 

The Commander-in-Chief’s suggestions for a modification 
of his Strategical plan are as follows ;— 

If the Poles follow up the operations on their right Wing, se 
must not push on towards the right; this would to repeat 
the mistake which General Denikin made when he did not 
effect a junction with Admiral Koltchak’s troops. The Bol- 
Shevists have concentrated considerable forces in the Kuban, 

ore we must send reinforcements there; but this is only 
possible if we evacuate the mainland of Taurida, although the 


at destroying the Soviet Power Jace and for all, and restoring 
pe on a general peace, 

e der-in-Chief urgently requests a speedy answer. 

Will you arrange all the necessary measures with the French 

Government and High Command and telegraph the result to us? 

On Augus 15th General Babiey’s units once avai attempted 

unsuccessful, Already the enemy 


; $ General Ulagay 
: , tchuiev, When I heard the 

news I ordered ships to rocted \ 
invading detachment on 4 d G to Atchuiey to take the 


ne t 
there on a torpedo- boat. tal Chatiloy went over 


On August 17th our units beg. 


umbers. For example, one of our divisions which hewn 
“hice hundred men and two hundred horses, had left Feodossia 
th one thousand two hundred men and two hundred and 
horses; it came back with one thousand five hundred 
T Doit who could were 
fe 
ie back and reported that the embarkation aon ae 
was 
and that the rest of the troops were not far feline “ 
\fcanwhile the situation on the northern front had become 
“rening. From 1 to the 17th fierce and bloody fighting 
Ae going on. The enemy attacked ys Without truce or 
ud ission, and drove back the 1st Army Corps in several 
ses, The Red cavalry came right down into our territory 
Pr rceatened our railway communications, The znd Army 
vé had been driven back to Perekop, 
Eha morning of the 17th the Struggle Was resumed with 
rat ferceness all along the front. Until midday the issue was 
mnan; General Koutepov thought that the situation was 
wy serious, I decided to go to Melitopol. At Djankoy 
‘ation we were warned that the Red Cavalry patrols were 
gpraching the railway. The signal. lights were put out, and 
tun went northwards in the twilight. I reached Melitopol 
inthe evening. In spite of the lateness of the hour, the 
tects near Staff Headquarters were crowded with ople. 
‘ay was limned on those gloomy, anxious faces. eneral 
v had not lost his coolness. Towards night, reports 
œn ftom most of the areas under fire. Although the day 
lade in some success for us, the situation was still grave. 


spe it Red coral in our rear boded al kinds of 


loch the enemy again attacked, and were every- 


akg MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


On the 19th I reached Kertch, The embarkation at Aich. 
Was progressing favourably. At Taman our troops had chug, 
a slight repulse, The chief of the detachment there Sutter 
that he had suffered heavy losses and must retreat. Porteſ 

Towards night this detachment reached the shore, | order 
it to be taken on board and back to Kertch. ed 

The expedition to the Kuban ended in failure, We y 

driven down on to a little Strip of Russian territo oa a 
coast, and from there we had to continue the gruggle s 
an enemy who commanded all the vast stretches of Russi 
Qur forces dwindled day by day; our resources Were used u 
The dead weight of failure was crushing my heart. Apai bh 
again I asked myself if it had not been my fault. Had . 
ev ing? Had all my calculations been accurate? 

e heavy fighting on the northern front, where the Red 
menace had been checked only at the cost of enormous effort; 
made it impossible to transfer any troops from this area to the 
seat of the Kuban operation. The direction mapped out for 
the raiding company had been well chosen. In Spite of the 
indiscretions of the Kubanians in authority whose idle gossip 
had threatened the secrecy of the operation, the exact landing. 
place had remained unknown to the enemy. The Reds had 

d us at Taman and in the Novorissiisk section. The 
troops had landed without loss, and three days later had taken 
the most important railway in Kuban, Timachevyskaia Station, 
thus coming within forty versts of Ekaterinodar, the heart of 
the Kuban, If General Ulagay had not hesitated, but hid 
marched straight on without a backward glance at his base, 

Ekaterinodar would have been taken in two days, and the 
northern Kuban would have been free. There is no gain- 
saying this. 

Yet at the same time, a great deal of what had happened 
had been my fault, I knew General Ulagay’s strong points and 
his weaknesses, When I appointed General Dratzenko, whom 
I did not know, to the post of chief-of-staff, I should have 
arranged all the details of the plan and the preparations for 


IN THE KUBAN 


operation myself. I had, however, entrusted the task to 
a Chatilov, who was also very busy, and therefore had 
been able to devote but little time to it. I blamed myself 
netly and could find no excuses for myself. 
* The only positive result of the expedition was the large 
mber of reinforcements, both men and horses, which we 
o added to out expeditionary force—it now numbered about 
h thousand Cossacks, This not only compensated for the 


vy losses we had suffered on the northern front, but even 
4 large surplus, 


oe collapse ot the Red troops on the Polish front became 


d more definite. More than one hundred thou 
more 3 fell into the hands of the Poles, Whilet about the ie 
en of men had been interned in Germany. At the same 
gm” ne probability of * between Poland and Soviet 
poe became greater and greater. Poland was said to have 
ee explicitly that “Poland sincerely wants peace”, Riga 
ae ready been mentioned as the seat of future ne otiations. 
yd ef General Chatiloy at Kertch and set out for Sebastopol 
p night of August 20th. As soon as I arrived 1 took 
0 could to poora our recent failure in the Kuban 
gost BSP unfavourable impression. 
E, after my arrival, Admiral MacCully, the chief of 
american Military Mission, paid me a visit. By order of 
a Government he submitted a series of written questions to 
D athe subject of the general policy of the South Russian 


Goneemment 


on OF THE SPECIAL AGENT or THE UNITED STATES 
Strats DEPARTMENT For Russta 


SEBASTOPOL, Russta, 


September 6, 1920. 
York EXCELLENCY, 


For the information a% the U.S. 
pecate very much a fairly licit and comprehensi 
tement by General Wrangel of his poli E “3 


and aims, The 
erg. questions suggest the character of the information 


x the policy of General Wrangel the restoration of 
fait on the basis of a general expression of the will of 
People, and is he pledged to the creation of a con. 


166 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Stiruent assembly to be elected 

on the basis of general and disc con Of the 
2. Does General Wrangel specifically FS gel Ple 

> ee upon sane any unreptesenta tive intension 

+ n j 

spent oring the sanétions of popular — 
3. Is the interpretation of recent declarati 

Wrangel corre&, that, recognizi mone of 

Denikin and Koltchak . — of a 

their experience, he does not regard the Profiting by 

of law and freedom in Russia as —— 

task; that he places first and foremott the n military 

of production and satisfaction of needs of ha nization 

who constitute the great majority of the Russi Peasants, 

that General Wrangel is organizing and — ; 

organization not for pursuing extensive war g an 

Bolshevism along the type attempted by Koltehat a 

Denikin, but would agree to protect against — 

nucleus of national regeneration; that, in sho the 

attempt is to create a centre of political and ** 

order ae oe effort, around which Russian 

and territories may gather free! 
onda see r 

4. Information exists that General Wrangel is introduci 
behind the lines local self-government by tieans d 
popularly elected Zemstvos and other democratic j 
and that, in particular, he is seeking to solve the land 
problem in an orderly manner by constitutional methods 
and by validating the ownership of the lands by the 
peasants. Is this information correct? 

J. Are there not a considerable number of refugees now 
dependent on General Wrangel's protection against the 
Bolshevists? Approximately how many such are 
these, aad to what clases and groupa do they da es 

ong? 

6. Would it be justifiable to conclude that General Wrangel, 
although bell ing his movement to be the present 
centre of Russia’s efforts at self-restoration and recovery 
of unity and national life, does not at the moment 
or claim to be the head of an all-Russian Government 
that he does not regatd himself as authorized to make 
treaties intending to be binding upon any future Russ 
Government that may be set up, or to grant co ad 
or otherwise dispose of the national domains 
resources? 


IN THE KUBAN 267 


7- Is the recent declaration of the policy of the U.S. Govern- 
ment satisfactory to General Wrangel, both as regards 
Poland and as revards the unity and integrity of Russia? 

&. What are the safeguards which General Wrangel feels 
can be relied upon, and Which may assure other nations 
that General Wrangel will be able tò pursue the policy 


As definite and explicit a Statement of his alms as General 
Wrangel may be good enough to make would be much 
appreciated. 

N. A. Mac; LLY, 
Rear-Admiral, U. J. N. 
To His Excellency, M. Peren Srat VE, 
Miniiler of Foreign Affairs, 
Soth R Government. 


The Admiral, a sincere friend of our cause, was simply 
reaming when he delivered this Questionnaire 10 me. He 
100 eved that the American Government’s request for answers 
wits questions Was a preliminary to America's recognition of 
ġe South Russian Government. On August 24th the tollowing 
vet to the questions was sent to Admiral MaccCul ly :— 


CONFIDENTIAL 


1, General Wrangel has declared many times that his sole 
um is to enable the Russian People to express theit 
wishes freely on the subject of the future government of 
the country. To-day, therefore, he can but affirm once 
again his intention of establishing conditions which will 
permit of the calling of a National Assembly based on 
universal suffrage, through which the Russian people can 
decide on the form of government for new Russia. 

+. General Wrangel has not the slightest intention of im- 
posing a Government on Russia which would function 
without the co-operation of a national representative 
body, or the sympathy and support of the people. 

i. The interpretation of General Wrangel’s recent declara- 
Hons in the sense that he does not regard the establish- 
ment of law and liberty in Russia as pre-eminently a 

ty task is perfectly justified. On the contrary, the 
of reforms which have already been carried out 


d MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
2 ] attaches pri . 

r General Wrange S prima 
pt erties wotk in the State and to tt a 
of the needs of the 22 who constitute 0 580 
majority of the Russ ery It is Precisely a 
he wants to foster the peaceful development of de 

overnmental action that General Wrangel h 


of this healthy nucleus is indi x 
E as a centre of gravity for the free dey 
ment of the final efforts of the Russian people for nations 
regeneration, 

4. The information concerning the reforms which G 
Wrangel’s Government has carried out by Creating 
district Zemstvos, and in agrarian spheres, is absolutely 
accurate, The first of these reforms anticipates decentil. 
zation and safeguards the local economic interests Of the 

pulation who will deal with economic questions 
through their freely elected agencies. The law concerning 
the district Zemstvos will be followed at a very early 
date by one concerning the provincial Zemstvos; both 
laws are to serve as a basis for a representative organ of 
a more general character. The Land Reform will de! 
with the agrarian problem in a radical way by allowing 
the legal remission by redemption of arable land to in 
cultivators who will become its owners; thus a 
class of small peasant proprietors will be created is 
accordance with the ideal of the Russian peasant. 

j. The number of refugees who have sought Genen 
Wiangel's protection against the Bolshevists is very 
high. It greatly exceeds five hundred thousand in the 
Crimea alone, and there are almost as many again scattered 
through the Near East, Egypt, and Europe. Mos of 
them are old men, women, and children. All thes 
refugees are benefitting in one way or another from the 
SH. port and help of the South Russian Government 


; Government be eed, General Wang! 

it is his duty to acilitate the return of tber 

Sees to their country and to allow them to devot 
themselves to productive work. This body of refuge 


a S eer S| eee SP. 


i 


7 


IN THE KUBAN 269 


of the most diverse elements. They belong to 
sh cloned od the population, for men of all classes found 
it equally N to endure the Bolshe vist tyranny. 
General Wrangel considers that the Government of 
which he is the head is the sole remaining depository of 
the idea of national regeneration and the restoration of 
Russian unity. He thinks, however, thar only a Govern- 
ment set up after the National Assembly has settled its 
nature should have the power to conclude treaties 
affecting the sovereign rights of the Russian people, or 
of disposing of the national patrimony. 
The declaration of policy which was made recently by 
the Government of the United States coincides in cvery 
respect with General Wrangel’s political programme. He 
is in complete agreement with the clauses dealing with the 
preservation of Russian unity and territorial integrity as 
well as with those dealing with Poland. General Wrangel 
would like to take this occasion to express his very 
deepest gratitude to the Federal Government. 


. General Wrangel realizes that if foreign Powers accord 


recognition to the work already performed by his Govern- 
ment, they would like to be assured in some way other 
than by a verbal declaration that their fear that the South 
Russian Government's activities may degenerate into a 
military adventure or a political reaction is quite un- 
justified, As regards their fear of a military adventure, 
General Wrangel begs to remind you that he is teady 
to end the Civil War as soon as the inte ity of the 
territory under his authority and the Cossac regions is 
guaranteed effectively, and as soon as the Russian people, 


firmly convinced that this population will never pronounce 
in favour of the Soviets, 


As for his personal affairs, General Tga has already 


opealy that his object is to enable the people to 
“xpress their wishes freely. He then will submit the 


sovereien voi i ed: 
hesitate ice of the Russian nation without the slightest 


SeBAstopor, 
n 41b-Stptember 6, 1920, 


eA MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


eavy fighting was Sill in progress on our no 
es aie — pushing back the enemy — Kal: 
and drawing ncat to one of the fortified positions. Ovka 

During the night of August 21st the units of the ap d 
Corps attacked the enemy, but were received by fut 
counter-attacks and bea from the artillery, Our o3 
fantry attacked the fortified position with tanks and sso i 
cats, and made a sudden incursion into the first line of ed 
enemy’s fortifications. In spite of heavy losses, our units the 
themselves against the second line of trenches which êd 
defended by a large number of machine-guns. The Rede 
replied with 4 counter-attack in front, at the same time 
enveloping both our wings. Two of our four tanks were 
destroyed by artillery fire. 

Before dawn our units were forced to return to their 
starting-place, for the enemy’s fire had grown more and more 
deadly, Ar seven o'clock in the morning all the units of out 
attacking force were ordered to occupy the most ad cous 
positions possible, and limit themselves to an active defence. 

Our second failure before Kahovka demonstrated the 
Strength of this position, the tenacity of the Reds in defending 
it, and the break-up of our infantry’s dashing offensive. 

To fill in the gaps made during the recent engagements 
ordered a fresh mobilization and a requisition of one thou- 
sand five hundred horses, These repeated mobilizations and 
requisitioning of horses weighed heavily on the people; yet 
all through our Struggle they manifested sincere sympathy 
towards us. But the recent military burdens had become 
insupportable, and cases of failure to mobilize became more 
and more frequent. 

Although I fully realized the insupportable weight of the 
sacrifices I asked of the population, * nevertheless com- 
pelledto enforce the impositions by every means in my power 
The implacable struggle demanded sacrifices from ever; bod 
The enemy took . — of the difficulty of the situation 
in our tear, and did their utmost to increase their propaganda 
behind-the-lines. 

Towards the middle of July the Bolshevists succeeded in 
getting into touch with the Crimean Committee of the 
munist Party by way of the sea. This Organization had bet’ 

for a time, but had renewed its activities wann 
the end of June, Motor-boats from Anapa and Novorissiisk 


PEFR PAE GF CF RBRSRE SR BOE, 


2 7 


F 


— 


kept up communications with the Bolshevists outside the 


On August sth a Communist detachment of about a dozen 
men, under the — of the sailor Mokrohussov, landed 
the coast, having run their motor-baat close in to the shore. 
The detachment was armed with machine-guns, cartridges, 
pand-grenades, and a large sum of moncy—five h d 
ion roubles in notes called “Romanovs (at this time a 
| Romanov rouble was worth seventy roubles in our currency), 
well as two hundred thousand pounds in Turkish money. 
yfokrohussov, with the aid of his confederates, succeeded in 
reachin the forests; he assumed the resounding title of “Com- 
der of the Army ot the Insurgents in the Crimea”, and 
began to recruit every kind of rolling-tone into his ranks. 
T wars the end of August Mokrohussov had collected about 
sorte hundred men, Whom he divided into three “regiments”. 

These bands behaved very eng A During the night of 

ly goth a detachment of Greens attacked a convoy of 
Ju taken away the horses, and blown up the ammunition. 
On Au a ath they had robbed the forest home of Massandra 
of a million roubles. 3 night of August zoth they 
the Bechui mines, robbed the Strong-box, burnt down 
55 losives depot, and destroyed the shafts. On August 
ôe P Mokrobussov’s bands invaded Kutchuk Ouzen and 
— off the opp of the police and eleven policemen. 
On the 29th 4 band of one hundred and fifty men had attacked 
de market-town of Sudak with four machine-guns, but the 
wonvalescent officers and soldiers there had been warned in 
i repulsed them, inflicting seat losses. 

The regional Revcom' which large sums of money 
wits disposal, was also working in the towns. In four months 
he Rercom“ had received from Moscow, through the 
‘h courier Raphael Kurgan, surnamed “Folia”, a million 
pots in notes, ten thousand pounds sterling, and gold 
nd diamonds worth fo million roubles. Communist Com- 
mittes had been formed at Simferopol, . Yalta, 
Frodossia, Kertch, and Eupatoria, all were well provided 
vith money. They all kept in communication with one 


oe A 


esa a Pr Raa ak Ff ee wae raAaeee 


L 

æ Ú mother by means of a brisk service of couriers. 

<i | On August znd a Communist centre was discovered in 
sò |] Yau; it was found to possess printing machinery, and had 
iss ' Revolutionary Committee. TRANSLATOR. 


ä 


a 


0 


272 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANCEL 


been maintaining communications with the Regional 
mittee. During August two of the Regional Co Com, 
couriers were arrested in the war zone; they Were aitte’, 
in espionage. Almost simultaneously the Soviet s SNgaged 
Simka Kessel was arrested at Perckop; he had W 
way from the Crimea to Odessa. d his 

A little later we managed to collect enough information 


to enable us to watch the people 
of the new Regio Communist 
August 218t, of a certain Mordukh 


assumed names. They 

in their rooms were found two hundred 
bles in bundles enclosed in 
ple’s Bank of Moscow, 


wra bearing 
onion of the Supreme Command's roubles, E gold and 
roubles; there was also some correspondence—financiets’ 
d n the political work of the Crimean 
Regional Committee. 
Gotzmann and Osman 
house were found letters 
which had pa becn used; in 


Revolutionary Committee, 
Gilert’s rooms letters were also found, as well as three million 
roubles in every currency of the world, which was the property 


of the Party. i 
The material collected by raids on the houses of the afore- 

mentioned men, and the absolutely sincere and detai 
enabled us to root out the whole 


confessions they made, 


network of the Bolshevist organization which had spread ovet 
to 


the Crimea. The number of people formally subj 
inquiry in the course of the month exceeded one 


penner urse 
undred and fifty. The organization of out enemy’s agents in 
the Crimea had dealt a shattering blow. 

I was indebted to General Klimovitch for the rapidity of 
che searches and the destruction of the Communist network in 


* 272 CU AN 


the district. The whole police force of the State, which was 
doing its duty very well and successfully, was under his 


. 

The elections to the District Zemstvos were completed in 
an astonishing short space of time. There were already sixty- 
eight agrarian distri& Soviets, Almost everywhere inquities 


i ‘ into the land reserves had been completed and lists of le 
a a wich a right to a plot of land in full — tnade Ral Many 
ty tit of the agrarian Soviets had already arranged their scale for the 
th gistribution of landed property. Proprietors ** tight of the 
Asty r new Jaw were already in existence. In the Melitopol and 
| pp Pol e Daieprovsk districts. the district agrarian Soviets h already 
> SN pegun to portion out several large estates, 

tiny. l The externals of life behind-the-lines no longer bore witness 
n Ne the recent days of anguish. In spite of its proximity to the 


ving Wty front, the negligence and debauchery so usual in towns behind- 
Und. che- lines Were conspicuous by their absence, The great number 
0 has the rf offices behind the front had fallen back into disciplined 
debe ways. Life went on quietly as usual. 
x 


CHAPTER VIII 
“CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL}» 


Towarps the end of August, the balance-sheet of the Bol. 
shevist disaster on the Polish front was drawn up; nearly 
two hundred and fifty thousand men and tens of thousands of 
horses had been captured by the Poles ot interned in Germany 
The remnants of the Bolshevist ef were in precipitate fli ght 
towards the cast, pursued by the Polish troops. 

The Ukrainian units, who were advancing rapidly, were 
operating on the Polish troops’ right wing. On the right bank 
of the Ukraine, revolts were flaring up everywhere, Companies 
of franc-tirewrs were harassing the Red troops ceaselessly, and 
attacking convoys, trains, and echelons on the road, 

We had succeeded in coming to an agreement with the 
Ukrainian franc-tireurs ; we were to re-equip them with arms, 
ammunition, and moncy; I circulated —— amongst 
the population of the Ukraine urging them to rise and throw 
off the Bolshevist yoke. 

During the last days of August a delegation from the largest 
company of franc-tireurs arrived, The commander of the 
company was an ex · officet of the old Imperial Guard; he was 
fighting for the moment under the yellow and blue Ukrainian 
flag. According to him, the population on the right bank 
of the Ukraine were exasperated with the Bolshevists, 
but the events of 1919 had left unfortunate memories of the 
Volunteer Army; these, combined with the able propaganda 
of the Ukrainians, did much to enlist 7 for the 
Scparatists, 

The growing excitement in the Ukraine set Ukrainian 
circles outside the country in motion. I learnt that a delegation 
of Ukrainian-Federalists, composed of Messrs. Markotun, 
Tsitovitch, and Moghiliansky, had left Paris for the Crimea. 

The strategical situation was as I had explained it to the 
French Government, Events on the Polish front made 


operations in the west of pr importance, If Poland should 
accept the peace which the Bolshevise were offering 80 
insistently, and Lloyd George's Government was extolling 
274 


e . 


eS eS bp =e roe 


bed nnn 
be — 


ments—nearly ten thousand Bre- 
the Army, We could 
few officers who had 
ies in 1919. Our local 
resources in men and horses had dwindled away to nothing. 
of j Open to us was our 

risoners; but their fighting value was only relative, 

I did my utmost to convince the Fren 


had been interned in German in addition to the ammunition 
which the victors had seized. Í proposed to form a 3rd Russian 
Army on Polish territory out of the remains of Bredov’s 
command and the detachments of Bulak-Balakhovitch and 
Colonel Permykin. I intended to amalgamate the commands 


into the hands of a French general who should work with 
representatives of the Polish and Russian Armies, 

I pursued these negotiations during my interviews with the 
French and Polish representatives, as Well as through my 
mpresentatives in Paris and Warsaw. 

Inthe middle of September the chief of the Polish Military 
Mission informed me that the Polish Government had agreed 
to authorize the formation of a Russian Army eighty thousand 
ogg on Polish territory, 
rho of our Foreign Communications telegraphed to 

ov: 


* 


Pointed out to us that this measure will simplify the 

to the (rp ledon cut down transport expenses from Poland 

' Crimea, and give the necessary time for the deyelop- 

this me, Our forces. The Commander-in-Chief is in favour of 
ure On the following conditions :— 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


1. This new Army must be placed on the right wi 
group of Polish-Ukrainian Armies, so thet in the Of the 
of the subsequent offensive it will be able to rej „ourne 
left wing of our Armies. loin the 

2. This Army must be called the 3rd Russian 


Army, 
present moment the Russian forces in the 8 J. At the 


composed of two Armies. e site 
3. The Commander of the 3rd Army must be appoi 
General Wrangel. n 


4. The zid Army shall be subject to the Commanderin 
Chief of the eastern anti-Bolshevig front until it 5 
into ditect contact with the southern front, when it shall 
pass under the command of General Wrangel 


Please inform the French Government and High Command 
of this. 


The Polish Government appeared to be willing to meet us. 
General Miller, our military representative in Paris, tele. 
graphed :— 


The Poles agree to send their military representative to 
Paris to discuss the co-ordination of our military operations 
with us. The General you send ought to be fully acquainted 
with all your intentions and plans, and should havea thorough 
understanding of the situation and your forces. 


To hurry on the negotiations I decided to send M. Struve 
and General Yusefovitch to Paris; the latter was to control 
the formation of the Russian units in Poland, but until he 
artived there the task fell upon General Makhrov. 

MM. Struve and Yusefovitch were to deliver to the French 
Government a brief memorandum signed by my adjutant, 
M. Krivochein, detailing my propositions :— 


ADJUTANT TO THE CoMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF SEBASTOPOL, 

THE ARMED FORCES OF SOUTH Russia September 15, 1920. 
Confidential. 

When Poland’s luck suddenly changed, the Russian Army 
was engaged in an attempt to liberate Northern Caucasis. 
The enemy had concentrated huge forces against our expe- 
ditionary force in the Kuban, — if we were to follow up 
our successes there we had to send fresh units to the front from 
Taurida. This made the retreat to Perekop necessary. The 
Army was already preparing to retreat when the defeat of the 


377 


“CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL!” * vid 
7 ; ; to 
Bolshevits oa the Polish front made it pae iof eara 
Should this plan be adopted, the protection of the Tauridan 
front will become of primary importance. It will Compr 
us to send fewer reinforcements to the Kubanian front, 
later will force us to abandon the operation in the Kuban 
altogether. Our expeditionary force, whilst Still on Kubanian 
territory, was ordered to send troops into the Crimea. It came 
back not only unreduced, but with its effective force consider- 
ably increased. Later on, the Russian Army will prepare an 
offensive, but there can be no hope of a decisive SUCCESS unless 
the operation is undertaken in co-operation with the other 
anti-Bolshevi&t forces. Such co-operative actions arc only 
possible by agreement. The amalgamation of the Ukrainian 
troops and the Polish Army is already an accomplished fact. 
For our part, a military convention with the Ukrainian Army 


isi ze of preparation. } 
Oe eae 2 ripe for the Russian and Polish Armies 


co-operate. Every subsequent success, every Step forward, 
* result only from the formation of a 9 And 


ce assumes a dominatin ition. The safety of 
8 vety 3 0 Poland on the one hand, 
ind the recognition of the South Russian Government and 
the help which has been given in the re-equipment of the 
Russian Army on the other, are the facts which make it obvious 
that the two Armies will freely consent to co-operate against 
the Bolsbevists under the command of a French general, 
ided that he works with representatives of the two anti- 

Poland’s cessation of hostilities and entry into negotia- 
tions with the Soviet Government puts the Russian Army into 
a very dificult position. The Bolshevist forces now set free 
will be thrown on to the southern front, and in a few months 
we shall have three and a half new Bolshevist Armies arrayed 
against us. 

But even under these conditions the Russian Army will 
not lay down its arms; it will continue the fight, hoping for 
fuccess and trusting in its ally, France, to whom it has always 
beea loyal, and who can now give it invaluable help, If the 
degonations between Poland and Russia are prolon d, and 
i the troops of Bolshevist prisoners in Poland and ermany 
wae and transported to our front with all speed, together 

the remains of General Miller’s and General Youdenitch’s 
We will be able to continue our struggle. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

— must be ptolonged until 
to transport the contingents from ' 
recruit the new units. Germany and Polang de 
The contingents which are to be and 
completely equipped and armed, and the — * tted mug be 
be furnished with the necessary equipment ; this hab 
from the Bolshevist materials of war which an Kiepe 


tured. 
mf all this were done, the Russian Army could 
the Struggle against the Bolshevists, and, even if it we CONtin ye 
alone, could be sure of ultimate success. Thus Poland 
rect assured that the Bolshevists would be unable to yi 
the peace treaty. Violate 
Over and above the delivery of materials of war to the 


ays 


loan, 
be covered by a special treaty concerning the of c 
coal, and other raw materials to France from Werler 
occupied by the Russian Army and those they intend to 
occupy. 


. 


We published articles our point of view in 
many organs of the Russian Press a road as well as in the 
newspapers of other countries, 

At the same time, I decided to pay a visit to the front with 
the representatives of the Allied Missions, for on the one hand 
I wanted to show them how Strong our position was, and on 
the other to prove to them by the evidence of their own eyes 
that we lacked technical equipment, and urgently needed help 


if we were to continue the Struggle. 
On the evening of August zoth I left for Sebastopol, 
accompanied by M. Krivochein, representatives of the Fret 
Polish, American, English, Japanese, and Serbian Military 
Missions, and several ian and foreign newspaper corte 


ndents. 
On the morning of August 3 1st the train Stopped at Taganach 
; ion of the 


Station, and we set o in cars to inspeét a secti 
fortifications. The fortifications were more nearly complete 7 
were 


this part of the front than an there else. There 
barbed-wire entanglements, armoured emplacements, 4 
pes labyrinth of trenches, and skilfully-concealed batterie 
newly installed heavy gees was engaged aj 
gunnery practice, and our aerop were observing for lt 


es “CONCENTR 
ae could see wih a me 
A tot w their 279 
in spite of me had been accom lene eyes what an 
Wh the almost c plished in tl ene 
. we returned to he 38 lack of — t sew monha 
Station, and there j ain we we cal equipm 
Bahivv's lend c aro Wen nak n Ainet 
Our squadron of a an division, whicl park and General 
Tkatchov, a bold croplanes, unde 1 was here in res 
ies ‘Id pilot, ex r the directio eserve. 
mancuvrcs, which wen xecuted a series f n of General 
most of the machines * ali the more io brilliant aerial 
only the incom S were in a very b. remarkable bec 
nparable bold Ty had State of AAUSC 
up for the deficiencies of his ness of the Russia at repair, and 
the military agents gather . When the 28 made 
expressed their 1 fund 8 y ing was over, 
most ot the machines were sencral Tharchoty airmen and 
we did not receive new n worn 5 that 
me powerless. I took oe soon, our air f — that if 
efforts I had made to N g opportunity to 8 would 
insurmountable obétacles | v some new acropla ention the 
enemies, For example the ad met with, not ly and the 
reatest difficulty, 2 e paa had bou Ee ftom our 
“by mistake” by one of the fi ain State! had gd a — 
The representati orcign Commissi estroyed 
P tive of the Eneli issions of Co 
ein sh, blushed furi ty Mission, the 
eral Babiev’s division march tiously at these wi 4 
After the review, the Cossack tched past in excel! ords, 
“Dii hit ka” A s showed off * ent order, 
(Diehitor, ), and their skill their horsemanshi 
foreign visitors. completely captivate 4 the 
a evening we reached Melitonol ated the 
O mAN 
of the 1st Acm y» Its chief, Gers and joined the General 
i short explanation of the general eral Dostovaloy, gave u 
of the catastro hes which had d position, and informed a 
train and left for Fedorovk Stat Supper we returned to c ; 
by es to Ro a Station. Fr O our 
Kronsfeld colony, on th ‘rom there we went 
Here we in pected Kornilov’s di e morning of September 100 
in teserve at the disposal of th Ceci which was being held 
a Stretched from — mese of the 2 
An altar had bee en of the huge s u 
and the priests i n erected in the mi quare to the 
lce A expe in glittering robe e middle of the square, 
Ihe religious , s were performing thei 
„ah canticles soared up into th en 
ulgatia. p into the peaceful 
The English, 


ato MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

autumn air, and far up, a : £ 

— th them. P, à hovering lark mingled hi, 

The faces of the soldiers were tanned 

their boots scorched and worn out, their Seether beaten 

and threadbare. Many of the men even lacked shi * disco 

and were wearing woollen vests instead. The, Altogether 

soldier dressed in a patterned cretonne shirt e WaS One 

shoulder-pieces, old khaki trousers, and yellow with canvas 
boots; another had no trousers at all, and was Wear al half. 
but a pair of woollen drawers. The terrible dettituee Nothing 
troops simply leapt to the eyes. But with what cate th Of the 
their old garments, polished up their ame oe 
dressed their ranks! After the Te Deum | presented 
tSt Kornilov Regiment with the Kornilovian flag, which the 
se to the first battalion to be named after G had 

Kornilov. This flag, which had been preserved by an r-a 

who had recently escaped from Bolshevist territory 

. as a precious relic by the regiment. sas 

e units marched past. The ranks passed by, one after 
the other, all beautifully straight, the men’s steps firm and 
vigorous, their faces contented and cheerful. It seemed as 
if they were the regiments of old Russia resurtected from 
the tomb. 

After the parade, the divisional commander offered us 
dinner in the village; during the meal I complimented the 
representatives of the Allicd Powers in the name of the 
Russian Army. In their reply, the foreign representatives 
expressed their sincere sympathy with us, and their desire to 
come to our help. These military men, delighted with every- 
thing they had just seen, had ceased to be politicians for a 
moment, 

After dinner we went out to inspect the positions which 
Markov’s and Drosdovsky’s reserve divisions were occupying. 
We found the same appalling want, the same gallant resem- 
blance to the old Russian regiments, the same confident, Steady 
manner. 

We returned to our train late in the evening. Durin the 
night M. Krivochein, the Allied representatives, and the 
foreign correspondents left for Sebastopol, whilst I went on 
to dye Station; from there I went ee tem- 

ber to inspect the positions held by the y 

The regiments of the znd Army Corps had been severely 


P” | 


mated, and their external appearance could got be compared 
with that of the regiments of the rgt Army Corps. But they 
were in a quiet and confident frame of mind. General Vitkovsky 
was working ceaselessly, doing his utmost to restore order to 


on the Crimean front. cw units were arriving from Caucasia 
ind the interior of Russia, and making for different sections 


The Red group on the ri bt bank of the Dni r, under 
he . “Comrade” Fidemann had — the title 
of the 6th Army. Its General Staff had arrived quite complete 

the northern front. The 6th Army was made up of the 
18, jrd, 13th (from Pskov), 46th, and s2nd divisions of 
ooters, and “Comrade” Goft’s cavalry brigade. 
and cavalry Army, under the command of the ex- 
Voiskovoi-Starchina ! Mironov, was also operating on the 
‘sht bank of the Dnieper: it was made up of the znd, 16th, 
10 218 cavalry divisions and a special mounted brigade. The 
ah and the znd cavalry Armies numbered fifteen thousand 
onets and six thousand sabres altogether, 
"Tie inch Soviet Amy was sill operating on Genera 
Koatepov’s front. It numbered thirty thousand bayonets and 
seven thousand sabres. The 7th, 13th, and 2nd cava Armies, 
numbered forty-five thousand bayonets and thirteen 
thousand sabres, On September 18 our effective forces did not 
ected twenty-five thousand bayonets and eight thousand 


sabres. E 

Having undertaken an operation in the west, we had firs to 
fight the Reds on the northern and eastern sections of the 
front, and thus free ourselves for an operation on the other 
side of the Dnieper, I decided to let the mounted troops of the 
Don Army Corps strike a blow and attempt to envelop the 
ké fank of the 13th Soviet Army. 

Fighting went on without pause throughout September. 
been unable to rest for months past, yet they 

Ace Lieutenant - Colonel. 


$ 
3 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


282 
erformed prodigies of valour. In a series of brillian 
—— the Russian Army scattered the enemy’s fo Eag. 
along the front from the Sea of Azov to the Kitchkasse p alj 
The task I had set it that of freeing our hands for an Operas 

On 


on the other side of 550 Dnieper—was accomplished, 
Whilst incessant ting was in progress at t 
2 on behind-the lines I — E 


intensive work was going ö 
quarters, left the house J had been occupying, and wen, y 
a much larger building called the Grand Palace, where i 10 


commander of the Fleet had previously had his quarters. M 
closest colleagues, M. Krivochein and General hatiloy, ty 


chief Of. staff, wert also at the Grand Palace. 
Our working-day began at seven o clock, and went on 


almost without interruption, until eleven o'clock or midnight 
Our attention had to be divided between the most varied 
problems : the war, internal and ony policy, economics, and 
finance, These last questions worried M. Krivochein and me 


more than anything else. 

In spite of all our difficulties, we managed to cover out 
ordinary expenses with our ordinary revenue. But the extra- 
ordinary Budget for this year showed a deficit of two hundred 
and fifty milliards. It is true that, because of the depreciation 
of the rouble, this figure was less considerable than it seemed, 
but, nevertheless, it was still very sarge: The Crimea was poor 


in local resources, and certainly could not support the entire 
el of a huge Army. Although our 


machinery and personn 

effective f hting forces did not number more than thirty 
or — ousand men (not counting the flect), the 

vast interior, the tens of thousands of wounded who filled 

the hospitals, the huge number of prisoners in the reserve 

formations, and the concentration camps, the military schools, 
the numerous organizations behind- the- lines, the administra- 
tive departments for War and the Navy, the fleet and the 
maritime departments, all added to the number of mouths 
that the Supreme Command had to feed—so that the 
grand total was something like two hundred and fifty or 
three hundred thousand. Feeding all these people cost more 
than all our 8 er. We were doing all we could 
to get ammunition abroad on the strength of our reserve 


securities. 
_ Corn was now our sole tt. The Government, throu 
its agents, continued to buy it up in Northern Taurida. ie 


“a % 


= n — ———— ꝓPW2— n — 
“CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL" 183 
Ministry of Commerce and cee | had made contraés with 
different people between July 24th and September 16th to 
deliver ten million pouds i of grain. Nearly a million and a half 
ds had already reached the Ports, and almost a million 
Po been exported. Nor only was corn our sole export and 
therefore of great economic value, but the arrival of Russian 
corn from the Crimes on the markets of Western Europe had 
giso great political importance. The Wettern Powers, especially 
France, who had suffered greatly during the War, Were suffer; 
fom a lack of bread, and the arrival at Marseilles of a ship 
ing two hundred and seventy-five thousand pouds of 


ercial circles which was direétly interested in the 
jon. The South Russian Government was accused of 
ing commerce“ and “Stran ling private enterprise“. 


‘or not put a Stop to these criticisms, 
y - ve Kill had only very faint hopes of obtaining a foreign 
for the existence of the South Russian Government 
very precarious; no one believed in its Stability. 
U. Krivochein thought out the scheme of convoking a 
al economic conference of industrialists, merchants and 
2 at Sebastopol to discuss the Possibilities of an 
onic and industrial revival in South Ruseia and discover 
way of raising a loan. The date of the conference was 
med fot the end of September, and the invitations were sent 
:soontdingly, Many of those who were invited, including 
fal Kokovtzov, Davydov, and Rittich, refused to come on 
yae pretext or another, but others accepted the invitation. 
The Poles began to negotiate with the representatives of 
Smet Russia. The Polish delegation arrived at Riga on 
‘tember sth~18th. From the very be inning, a complete 
drergence in their views was obvious, Each side scemed to 
conditions which the other could not possibly accept; 
ertheless, negotiations were not broken off, Behind the 
ads of the negotiating parties the clash of interests of the 
tte Powers could be distinctly felt. 
,"@peared that the Bolshevists had a very clear view of the 


foresaw that they would reach an agreement 
seats Rasian measure of "eight roughly equivalent to forty English pounds, 


ro n 


st MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
with the Poles in some way or anothe 
leaders decided to settle accounts wick Gon $ò 
sent round the watchword "Concent dir Other 
¢ remnants of the Red Armies had * Wrange 
2 without a pause before the Polish — 
€ mmand now launched all i : ; 
3 all its available feserves 
In mid-September we began to teccive į ' 
Boudenny’s cavalry (the A. Army) unt anne thay 
from the south-west section of the Polish front mung South 
Unexpected changes had taken place in the French G 
ment. M. Deschanel, the President of the Republic. hai na” 
seriously ill and had been compelled to resign. M. Mi fallen 
had been eleged in his place. M. Leygues was apy 
President of the French Council. MM. Petit and 
the colleagues of the ex-President of the Council who tad 
rted the policy of a e with national Rund, 
ne out of office, I sent the new President a 
co ae telegran of 
ember 20th I went to Melitopol for a few hours and 
conf with Generals Koutepoy Dratzenko, The pee. 
parations for the expedition across the Dnieper had been com. 
pleted, and the operation was due to begin on September 25th, 
On my retum journey to Sebastopol, I escaped falling 2 
victim to a plot by the purest accident, A quarter of an hour 
before my train was due, a mine had been discovered, A 
had been mowing the grass near the railroad and had 
noticed an electric cable. He had time to communicate 
with the signal-box on the line, and my train had been held 
up at the nearest Station. The detachment of sappers who were 
rushed to the ipot borur a mine of considerable size. 
If the criminals been able to carry out hae pie, there 
would not have been much left of our train. Unfortunately, 
the criminals escaped. A most thorough inquiry was held, and 
it was — that a certain Stefanovitch-Stivenson knew 
somethin of the crime; he was arrested, but escaped from 
prison a kv days later. a A a 
A delegation from the National Ukrainian Party arrived in 
the Crimea; it consisted of its president, Markotun, id 
„General Tsitovitch, and a member of the Party, one 


secretary 

i The National Ukrainian was hostile to 

Mogin Separatist policy; it was the idea of 
e 


T 


ð= Oo S| ww N he Oo =r å- os eet. rer 


>y — wV so > 


r 


Russian unity with local autonomy for the Ukraine. The 
Party was wor in close co-operation with the Ukrainian 
Government of cia, of which Petruchevitch, who had 


roclaimed the union with Russia, was president. The National 
Pikrainian Party had no real Strength, * it was sympathetic 
to us, and had a few conneétions in the Ukraine and 


Afairs, and General Chatilov, my chief of- taff. I expressed 
my complete agreement with its principles as explaine by the 
ed my whole policy on the 
Were in arms against 
ism, and that I Was ready to support the formation of 
zutonomous national units on the saen fines as those adopted 
ig my agreement with the Cossacks, The Patty also received 
c mater p 4 

On September 18th the Atamans of the Don, Kuban, Tere 
sod Astrakhan organized a banguet in honour of the Ukrainian 
on the premises of the Scamen’s Club. The Ataman of 
ihe Don, in the name of the Cossacks, welcomed the Ukrainian 
ion, which was a personification of the idea of union 
vader Russia, the mother of them all. He led a cheer for 
Russia. M. Markotun, replying, emphasized the fatal character 
ofthe Separatist tendencies which those foreigners who desired 
the partitioning of Russia were Supporting, He dwelt on the 
25 which the South Russian Government had obtained 
sioce it had abandoned its uncompromising attitude towards 
the different nationalities of Greater Russia, and had achieved 
the union of all the Russian forces in their Struggle against 


the common enemy. In conclusion, he gave the toast of the 
Commander-in-Chief. 


I replied to both peakers, In my speech I inted out that 
tenen was a menace not only to Russia, but to the whole 


world. To the Bolshevists, Russia was nothin but a funeral 
ft, with the help of which they hoped to set ight the whole 
In our Struggle for the cause of Russia we were 
avin and Poland owed her recent overwhelming 
aof largely to us. Ihe Polish Press had many times 
"oa € view that Poland is fighting not agains the 
People, but against the representatives of the Inter. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


286 

‘ nal. —4 hope, 1 said. “chat the near gun l 
— lie to these declarations, and that Poland will ney Rot pi 
those who are fighting for the common cause of abandon 
civilization.” ture and 


n. 
M. Mikhalsky, the representative of the Polish Mise 


emphasized, in the course of his speech, the fa& that aig) 
the Polish Government had nat mentioned the dite Oy 
war in its declaration, it was, in effcét, a fight a Ae 

International. “The promise of a new frontier will nor — 
the war—our Government will not call a halt, for it is — 


of victory. 

On September 20th the Gh wary Statute concerning th 
district os was publ ed. The elections for the 
district Zemstvos Were already over in some of the district. 

The population had shown great moderation and co 
sense at the elections. The disorganization of local life bad 
given rise to 2 healthy tendency towards union. In mos of 
the districts the wealthier peasants had been elected; some bi 
landowners had also been returned. The district Soviets which 

iJ] i in those regions where eg had not been 
replaced by Zemstvos were very hard at work. In most of the 
istribution of the land had 


districts the inquiry into the 
dand finished, and the new terms of ownership 


laces the peasants’ rights of owner 
ship over the land on which they worked had already been 
consolidated. 

the richest districts the wealthier peasants were 
buying the land direétly from the owners. The owners received 
full payment immediately, and the peasants were free from 
redemption fi in fü The people manifestly wished to 
Se the land in full ownership, and to acquire it legally. 

e population was echoing the s irit of the new law. 

The number of friendly transactions between peasants and 
landowners would doubtless have been still lar i 
bee Aa the difficult conditions created by the 
an continual mobilizations which depri peasants 
of manual labour and horses. * 

Whilst the reorganization of the Zemstvos was going on, 
the municipal governments were not forgotten. 
tember 237 a conference met under the residency of the 
Deputy-Director of the Administration of the Interior; it 
discussed a project concerning the elections for the munici 


“CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL? sy 
councils. The basis of the electoral system was to remain 


intact; the reform was to be limited to the methods used 
at elections. 


On Septernber znd, Admiral Sablin, rhe Commander of our 
Flect. fell ill He had been unwell fora long time, but had been 
fighting against his illness. Now he was compelled to take to 
pis bed. His disease —cancer of the liver—grew tapidly worse, 
gad his case became hopeless, It was a great loss for the fleet, 
for Admiral Sablin was energetic and able, and had set the 
geet in order in spite of the extreme ditficulty of the situation, 
the lack ot material, and the varied composition of the ctews 
which had been recruited haphazard, and were quite untrained, 
Ihe ships had been cleaned up and repainted and the crews 

jisciplined. Nearly all the damaged cquipment had been 
red, and reserve supplies of fuel, amounting to five 
pundred thousand pouds of coal and one thousand five 
unäred pouds of oil, had been concentrated in the ports in 
— of an evacuation, The men-of-war of our squadron wete 
peeping a Strict watch on the coast and were covering our 
movements. Every air-raid that our aeroplanes had under- 
aken had been successtul, There was no hope of Admiral 
s,blin’s recovering. SO I offered the post of Commandant of the 
let and Director of the Ministry of Marine to Admiral Kcdrov. 
On September 2oth we received a French wire 
fom Batoum. The French representative informed us that 
ever! thousand Cossack rebels, commanded by General 
fosikov, had retreated to the coast in the Sotchy-Adler 
sation, after an engagement with the Bolshevists ; they wanted 
io take refuge in Georgia, but the Georgian Government had 
refused to let them enter the country. The Cossacks were 
sking for help. I immediately ordere cartridges, shells, and 
provisions to be sent off to them by transport-ship. I also 
ent a torpedo-boat to establish communications with the 
bez. General Chatilov sailed on this torpedo-boat. He 
tamed on September 22nd. 


General Fostikov, who had been organizing his revolt since 
te summer, had collected several thousand Cossacks. After 
22 vi&orious engagements, he had freed a large part of 
Degel and Laba districts from Red domination. But his 
Bie pea becom : 3 pes oar failure at the Kuban, 
tid uution, and little by little the Red troo 
"rounded the rebels. General Fostikov foresaw that be 


less message 


288 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


would have to evacuate the Kuban, and so 
into touch with me through —. where 22 E to ge, 
the Kubanian leaders had congregated after Fhe ber of 
capitulation of General Bukretov’s Army. But al tefl 
patches had been intercepted by the Kubanian leaders his dis. 
not reached me. Finally, General Fostikov learnt fro nn hag 
shevist newspaper which he had picked Up at the fro à Bo}. 
France had recognized the South Russian Government thar 
so he had attempted to get into touch with me throug, ad 
French representative at Batoum. This time | had i, the 
his dispatch, “ceived 

Recently General Fostikov had been entirely surro 
y the Bolshevists, and had been suffering from a terrib| 
sho of ammunition, so he had decided to retreas : 
Georgia. He had persuaded all the Cossacks who had wanted 
to go back to their own homes to give up the idea and retreat 
with the others—a detachment of two thousand men—into the 
Sotchy area. He was having difficulty in holding out there. 
He had used up nearly all his provisions and ammunition, 
The Georgians had refused to let the Cossacks march through 
their territory. Immediate help was necessary, Unfortunately 
n made it impossible for the tt- 
ship to leave. A days later the man-of-war set out one, 
In the meantime a wireless message arrived announcing that 
the Cossacks had retreated to Georgia under pressure from the 
Reds ; the Georgian troops had surrounded and disarmed them, 
The Reds were 8 extradition, 

I ordered the torpedo-boat which was escorting the trans- 
port-ship to embark the Cossacks, cost what it might; should 
the ee put up any opposition it was not to hesitate to 

on them, 


At first the Georgians answered with a summary refusal to 
allow the troops to embark. After long-drawn-out negotia- 
tions, we arrived at a compromise. The Georgians feared the 
Bolshevists, and would only agree to the embarkation of the 
Cossacks on condition that we pretended to use armed force! 
The torpedo-boat hurled a few torpedoes into space, the 
5 detachment retreated, and the Cossacks came on 

I ordered General Fostikov’s detachment of neatly 
two thousand men to be landed at Feodossia, where the 
Cossacks were given rest, clothes, and ammunition, 
would enable them to be sent to the front again later on. 


CHAPTER IX 
ACROSS THE DNIEPER 


PREPARATIONS for the operation across the Dnieper had been 
in progress for nearly a month, The collection of the necessary 
material for pontoon-bridges was a very difficult task, for 
e was none in the Crimea. The operation had to be pre~ 
d with the utmost secrecy, because its success depended 
y on its being a surprise attack. It was necessary to 
a detailed survey of the banks of the Dnieper, for 
che configuration of the lower reaches (the “plavnias”) 
every year after the great spring floods. Duri 
dea ten days of September we were at last able to 
hunch a pontoon-bridge on the Dnieper near Uchkelka, 
nich is in the bend of the river just where the current 
— to flow westwards, and curves back towards the 
rest. 
7 who had been defeated in the middle of 
ber, were showing no signs of activity on the 18 
N front. The demoralized — — of the 13th Soviet Army 
ere avoiding all contact with our troops, and were apparently 
dining with the reserves with a view to a future action. 
nage of the 13th Army was continuing to reconnoitre 
on the eastern section of the front, 
The Reds had concentrated considerable forces opposite 
General Dratzenko’s 2nd Army. In spite of a well-organized 
jonage service, they did not succeed in discovering in 
the spot at which we intended to cross the Dnieper. 
But in anticipation of our match towards the west, the Red 
Command had massed their best units from the southern front 
oa the sight bank of the Dnieper. Boudenny’s 1st cavalry 
was from the south-west front (on the borders 
cia) by forced marches, and was ee for this 
of the line. It was expected on the southern front about 
ae 16th. Before it arrived we had to defeat the enemy 
—— massed across the Dnieper (the and ca 
a by crag units from the 6th and 13 
in order to * both its banks safe for us; 


why 


this was an indispensable reliminary conditi 
penetration into the Ukraine. on Of out deeper 
During the night of September 25th our infant 
the ford at the Isle of Khortitza (near Alexandro J Tone) 
were up to their armpits in water and under — they 
machine-gun fire from the Reds, yet they seized the 1 and 
began to advance, The enemy retreated before o OPES and 
all along the front. On the night of the 26th, the ar attack 
bridge on the Dnieper near Uchkelka was ready, and the 
body of the and Army began to cross. mug 
From the 26th until the 28th, those units of the and 
which had the Dnieper followed up their — 
and repulsed the Reds. Our cavalry broke through the 
lines and carried off man trophies. On September 28th 
took more than three t usand prisoners, eight guns, și 
armoured cars, and an armoured train. > a 
On September 29th General Babiev’s cavalry troop advanced 
south-westwards in an attempt to circumvent the enemy 
position at Kahovka. The 8 developed favourably . 
The Reds strove to check our offensive, for it threatened 
their principal lines of communication between the 6th and 
the 2nd cavalry Armies; they attacked us simultaneously on 
the east (where General Koutepov and the rst Army were) 
and at Kahovka. The Red Command hoped to deflect our 
troops from their set purpose by this mancuvre, the aim of 
which was to catch us in @ vice; a similar manœuvre had been 
tried several times during the summer campaign in Northern 
Taurida. The enemy drove back the units on General Koute- 
vs right wing and advanced on Melitopol. But a few da 
ter the Reds were repulsed by the 1st Army all along 
front. Local forces had retaken the position we 
held before Kahovka and in the Kherson section. 
Meanwhile General Dratzenko’s znd Army was proceeding 
with its operation. I was very dissatisfied with Dratzenko’s 
conduét; he was behaving in an indecisive, timid manner, and 
was simply groping his way along. . . . His lack of clear, 
precise decision, and the absence of a strong lead from the 
ee of the ris was ee Ip eff Ly ‘ 
e of the 3 egraphed to 
Dratzenko demanding decisive action. s Pe out that 
through his indecision we were running the risk of losing 
everything we had won by our initial successes. Our air· cout 


ACROSS THE agi 
reported that the Reds were beginning to evacuate the armed 
fortress of Kahovka. I ordered General Vitkovsky’s units to 
attack this position at dawn on October 14. 

I was awakened during the night. General Dratzenko 
teported that he had encountered a — force of the enemy’s 
ttoops on the right bank of the Soya war and had suffered 
heavy losses; not being willing to risk the complete annihila- 
tion of his army, he had been compelled to give the order 
ue K to the left bank... . The whole Operation had 

apsSed. 

At dawn General Vitkovsky’s units launched their attack 
on the armed fortress of Kahovka, bur they were repulsed. 
gr units had reached the barbed wite, but had been unable 
et through it; they had been forced to throw themselves 

a the ground, and had suffered heavy losses from the encmy’s 

-pensive artillery-hre. The tanks detachment had succeeded 

in gerting into Kahovka, but had been killed almost to a man. 

ee information we had received from our observation 

Janes concerning the evacuation of Kahovka had been 

r enlutely incorrect. 

In spite of the repeated demands which I sent to the Staff 
“the 2nd Army t roughout that night, I could obtain no 
of ‘Ils of the events which had taken place on the left bank 
vf the Dnieper. We merely learnt that the retreat had been 
feed on the north under cover of the Kubanian sharp- 
shooters commanded by the gallant Gencral Tzyganok, and on 
west, under cover of the Terek plastounes from Firsovka. 
the cavalry was in complete disorder; the artillery and trans- 
med a long ribbon which was winding over the bridges 


pt the left bank of the Dnieper. — l 
Atnine o clock in the morning I received a laconic telegram 
fom General Dratzenko: “General Babiev was killed by a 
dell to-day—September 30th.” This explained everything. 
With the death of their adored leader the cavalry had los 
hart, their nerve had gone, and with it their faith in their 
own Strength. General Naoumenko, who had taken over the 
ommand, had also been wounded and was unable to save 
te situation, The regiments had fallen a prey to confusion, 
The units were making for the bridges with all speed. The 
much heartened, had resumed the offensive. The 
meli in the ranks of the disabled cavalry grew still 
‘Thete was no longer any possibility of restoring order, 


j 


j * towards the bridges. The ca 


Everyone was hut ( shin rapes Spee patta snd ho — 
enko, mu move y S spe 
‘ scean a a general retreat to the left bank of ad 


epet. ° of October 1st, our units had retr 
— Deeper THE pontoon- bridge had been taken categ 
. rowed to the left bank. ond tha moin. of O&ober 3 
ee er 
the Samut and Terek regi deere Aena 


ired, crossing 
Peet iss . operation was over. It had been thought 
out carefully, prepared clev erly, and developed Strictly accord. 
ing to plan, and yet it had ended in failure, Our failure Was 
ed partly to that disastrous accident, the death of Gene nl 
Babiev, and partly and more importantly to the me i man. 
N of General Dratzenko, Commander of the 2n Army, 
He acknowledged this himself with rare moral c ena 
quite winning honesty, and begged to be released from his 


d. 
2 ptember 26th we had received news that the Poles 


had signed an armistice. Hostilities had ceased on the Polish 
front, and the Red Command was free to hurl its entire 
forces against us. At the same time the negotiations which 
my representatives were pursuing with the French Govern- 
ment led us to hope that France would not abandon us and 
leave us helpless. M. Struve reported that he was wn i 
« French loan for which the auspices were favourable, — 
that later on we might expect help in the form of ammunition, 
In a few days’ time a French High Commission, accompanied 
by a Military Mission, was to leave for the Crimea. The 
Crimean representatives of the Polish Government continued 
to assure us that the Poles sincerely desired to reach an agree- 
ment with us, and gave us to understand that the signature of 
the armistice was only a forced concession to England, and 
was far from being a peace, 
A daily paper reached Sebastopol containing an interview 
with Prince Lubomirsky, the diplomatic representative of the 
Polish Military Mission in the Crimea — 


Prince Lubomirsky, a member of the Polish Mili 
— just arrived in Sebastopol from Warsaw. ＋ 
cussed seven Our correspondent, Prince Lubomirsky dis- 

interesting questions of the moment. 


r Sosa Ss TS 


ACROSS THE DNIEPER 293 
The conclusion of the armistice with the Bolshevists was 
due to a whole series of reasons. The Polish Government wants 
neither the armistice nor a pio In spite of the terrible Russo- 
German war which was fought out on Polish territory, the 
Polish people have nothing but hatred for the Bolshevists ; they 
are ready to continue the war against them. The principal 
reason for the armistice is that, except for France, the Western 
countries not only refuse to support Poland, but even insig 
on the cessation of the war with the Soviets. 
Europe's policy is dictated by the following causes: the 
War industrial revival demands raw materials; there is 
a shortage of the materials which formerly came from Russia, 
and the gap cannot be filled from elsewhere. In the West they 
imagine that the moment they conclude a peace with the 
Soviets, Russia will begin to flow with rivers of milk and 
honey. It is the Bolshevists themselves who have fostered 
this attitude, hiding the truth from the Wet. In addition to 
this principal cause, circumftances of a technical kind have 
also exerted an influence on the signing of the armistice. 
The Czechs would not let material of war and ammunition 
come through into Poland. The free town of Dantzig was 
holding up all goods addressed to Poland. The Polish troops 
were very short of shells in spite of the help which their gallant 
friend, France, had given them. All these reasons taken 
together have forced the Polish Government to conclude not 
a peace but an armistice. 


On the subject of an alliance between Poland and General 
Wrangel, Prince Lubomirsky said: 
Polish administrative circles are very sympathetic to the idea 


of an alliance with General Wrangel; I am certain that such 
an alliance will be concluded in the very near future. 


Although the Polish Armies had suspended hottilities, the 
Polish Government was Still able to help us very effectively 
by prolonging the negotiations and so detaining the Red 
forces 9 front We kept open our lines of com- 
munication with the Poles only with the greatest of difficulty. 
Veonly managed it at all through the intermediary of France. 

tempts to establish communications with Warsaw by 
fs, came to nothing. In spite of all my demands, the 
u led High Commissioners categorically refused to give 
dannen to set up à wireless Station on the site of the 

Russian Embassy at Bouyouk-Dere.t 


Near Constantinople. 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


204 

Although I cherished no great illusions abo á 
milds” f did not give up hope that the Polish Gen, ign 
under pressure from France, would delay the Wetament, 
of the peace as long as possible, in order that Conclusion 
complete the formation of our Army on P ih te might 
or at least have time to transfer Russian troops to f. 
Crimea. 0 

Once we had received reinforcements and materials of 
and had arranged the projected loan, we would be oo 
continue the Struggle. With this in view, it was es © to 
char we should keep our hold on Northern Taurida. A retre 
beyond the isthmus into the Crimean peninsula would 1 
only condemn us to hunger and every kind of privation, ika 
would be the confession of our powerlessness to continue an 
active Struggle; this would deprive us of all future help from 
France. Once we were shut up in the Crimea, we — cease 
to be a menace to the Soviet Government, and therefore 
to be of any interest to the Western Powers. 

The failure of the Trans-Dnieper operation was having its 
inevitable reaction on the spirits of the troops. Our recent 
heavy losses had still further weakened our effective forces, 
and we could not fill in the gaps immediately. The fortified 
camp at Kahovka was 2 continual menace to us. The enemy 
all along our front were receiving reinforcements daily. 
Boudenny’s cavalry was expected to reach one of the sections 
on the right bank of the Dnieper the second week in Octobet. 
When the 14t cavalry Army arrived, the enemy’s forces would 
be three or three and a half times greater than ours; their 
effective cavalry force was five times that of ours. Further- 


more, their artillery and technical equipment was 


superior to ours. 
On October ist 1 summoned Generals Koutepov and 
Chatilov to a conference. I proposed that my most intimate 
colleagues and I should discuss every of the following 
uestion: ought we to risk a battle in front of the Crimean 
asses, or should we evacuate Northern Taurida and retreat 
behind the isthmus? We took into consideration al 
prevailing conditions, and were unanimous in our decision 0 
lisk a battle in Northern Taurida. It was a last des 
venture, but any other decision would inevitably have led 
Straight to the final crash. 
At Sebastopol I found news awaiting me that Poland had 


5 


ACROSS THE DNIEPER 295 
ed the peace. It had been signed by Russia and the Soviet 
12 — side, and Poland on the other. The inde- 
dence of the Ukraine and of White Russia was guaranteed, 
and both parties waived their indemnity rights. Poland received 
compensation for all property, evacuated from her territory 
since August 1, 1914. The treaty containing the preliminary 
ce terms had been signed on September 29th, and the 
interview with the Polish diplomatic representative which had 
gppeared in the papers on October ict had been given after 
the signature of the peace treaty, The Poles were consistent 
in their duplicity. 

The news that Poland had signed the peace did not cteate 
much of a stir amongst the largest classes of our population, 
The majority of the people did not realize its direct bearing on 
the future of our struggle, nor did they understand the im- 

ce of the failure of our Itans- Dnicper operation. The 
eral Staff's communiqué on the Copas taken during the 
fre days operation—thirteen thousand five hundred prisoners, 
rwenty-seven guns, six armoured cars, and one armoured 
uin Saved the N from realizing that we had suffered 
; serious defeat. I did my utmost to prevent the news of our 
iure from becoming current. It was now more necessary 
than ever that foreigners should be convinced of the Stability 
of our position, r 

The last sitting of the Financial and Economic Conference 
took place on Oaober 4th in my presence, I thanked the 
members of the Conference for the support which they had 
given the South Russian Government, and expressed my 
coavidtion that when they went abroad they would not slacken 
in their support of the Russian National Cause. | mentioned 


the dificult Struggle which we were undertaking and the 
pivations which the Army was suffering, and remarked 
asually that the enemy’s numerical superiority—for they 
could now use their entire force against us and our own lack 
of ammunition would oblige us to retreat into the Crimea, 
“but soon, when we have rested and reorganized, we intend to 
knew the Struggle”, 

15 a forsset ee 1 decisive battle in Northern Taurida 
W out t us, i i 
ition in adhe y tor us, and I was preparing public 
On Ofober sth the Financial and Economic Conference 
ts work; it proposed a series of practical financial 


* MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


and industrial measures, and adopted a resoluti 
amongst other things that:— lution 
The Financial and Economic Confere 
ly to the huge task and the vil end amet but boy 
which the South Russian Government are 7 explo; 
this very moment, and to the results which they — . 


in so short a time. In a country rava wer : 
of the Bolshevist Government, Sete à re the crime 
life and a new civil order are rapidly being established 


The same day I gave & sup in honour of the 
the Conference. MM. P. Bark, V. Riabuchinsky, y aben of 
and others spoke. M. Riabuchinsky's speech was parti Gourko, 
brilliant and vigorous. I read my order to the Army ularly 
to Poland’s peace treaty with Soviet Russia. cferzing 

ORDER FROM THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEP OF um 

Russian Army 

No. 3697- Ofsber 6-19, 1920, 
To Every Russtan SOLDIER 
The Polish Army which has been fighting side by side with 


SEsASTOPOL. 


rs and traitors who designate ves the Soviet 
t of Russia. We are now alone in the 


which will decide the fate not only of our country but 
to free our native land from 


whole of humanity. Let us Strive t 
the yoke of these Red scum who recognize neither God not 
ion and shame in their wake. By 


delivering Russia over to i 
j tion. 


55 
get 
FU 
go 
TE 
8 
f 3 
17 
— 

HI 
el 


_ fee eae 


: 
s 
8 
S 
F 
4 
Sh 
F 
y 
5 
5 


blood. By the united effort of all the loyal sons 
land, we tore viGory once again from the hands of the 
and for the last six months we have fought them without 
Soldiers! the freed lands of Russia look upon you 
love: our brothers in the Red butchers’ dungeons pel 
faith in you; and I, your old comrade-in-arms, trust a 


the 


g$ 


E 


55 


ACROSS THE DNIEPER 297 
vincible eagles. This is not the first time that we have waged 
unequal warfare. God is not on the side of might, but of right, 


GENERAL WRANGEL. 


On October 6th I received a telegram from Ataman Semenov 


who was in command of the fighting in the far cast of Russia. 
It ran as follows: 


I understand the character of the Cossacks, the native ttibes 
and the peasants who live on the borders of eastern Russia, 
and I have come to the irrevocable decision, that not onl 
must I recognize in your person the Government of Sou 
Russia, but also that I must submit to you as to the successor of 
the legitimate Russian Power, whilst I remain the chicf authority 
in far eastern Russia and retain the powers of Commander- 
in-Chief and Pokhodny Ataman of the Cossack troops of 
Transbaikalia, Amur, Oussouria, Yenissey, Siberia, Oren urg, 
and Bachkiria, the last four States having become our property, 
together with their Governments. 

The rural population which was intoxicated with the delights 
of Bolshevism has already begun to grow sober again; the 
volunteer Cossacks, the native tribes, and the easants, are 
returning to our side. The units of my Army find this tate of 
affairs in Transbaikalia, the Oussourian region and Northern 
Mongolia. In my own name and in that of my troops and the 
population which is subject to me, I compliment you on the 
great services which you have rendered to your country, 

CoMMANDER-IN-CHIEF AND PoxHopyy ATAMAN, 


Lreut.-Gen. SEMENOV. 


Gallant General Babiev’s funeral took place on October 5th. 
I was oprane with sadness as I followed my old comrade’s 
ofn. 


till another of our glorious heroes was dead, Yet 


another name had beeg added to the long list of Russian 


warriors who had expiated their country’s shame with their 
blood. 
On October 6th the French Mission, with the Count de 


Martel at its head, arrived on board the cruiser Provence. 
A guard-of-honour formed of Cossacks of the Guard was 


* 


waiting it on the quayside, General Viazmitinov, Chief of the 


a aay Administration, and M. Tatichechev, Pepu Disse 
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, welcomed the Mission in 


name. A large two-Storied house was reserved for it. 


A Cossack title corresponding to Commander-in-Chief of the Cossack troops. 


295 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


The following day I received th 
8 of my adjutant, M. Keivochea e ms tel j the 
x eneral Chatilov, and M. Tatichechey. The Co ctf Sag 
rought with him Admiral de Bon, Commandante Marte] 
Mediterranean A ange (the cruiser Provence w nok the 
PA Cena 35 General Brousseay the erty 2 
nc ta i Q 
aa, Ma ry ssion, and Colonel Buchenschutz, its 
When he gave up his lett f j 
O eA g p ers of credit, the Count de Marte) 


My Government has appointed i i 
Your Excellency under the title of High Comin resentative 
French Republic, and thereby seeks to emphasize the f the 
tance it attaches to the alliance and sincere friendship whi h = 
always existed between the French and the Russian “ts 
in spite of all trials and tests. We can never forget the pr 
able help which Russia gave us at the beginnin * 

r Ahe beginning of the war 
when the waves of the German invasion were breaking ove. 
our frontiers. We know that the Peace of Brest-Litovsk Ain 
the work of a distinct minority, which alone was responsible 
for that piece of treachery. France has never attempted any 
compromise with the Soviet Power, which of its own free 
will has put itself outside all known laws. 

France is the sincere friend of all true defenders of liberty, 
law, and order; that is why she has recognized, with the sia- 
cerest sympathy, that Your Excellency has eStablished a demo- 
cratic Government which respeéts the rights of national 
minorities and relies for support on an Army which is in close 
touch with the people. 

France, who is still working to repair the ravages of the 
war, and has not yet rebuilt all her own ruins, has decided to 
give you her full moral support, and as much material help 
as possible. 

You know the President of the Republic’s feelings for Russia. 
M. Leygues, the head of the French Government, has defined 
his policy clearly in the following words, which he addressed to 
the Parlement: We want the Russian people, who are so sim 
and good, so interesting, so worthy to live an honourable and 

powerful life, to find peace, order, and prosperity once again. 
It is as the representative of such feelings that I have come 
to the Crimea. Most cordially and sincerely I put my oppa 
and help at your disposal, both as a conscientious executor ad 
the wishes of the French Government and as a sincere fri 


of the Russian people. 


Ww 


ing them, and to make it possible foe then Which is oppress- 
own destiny, 

You can rely upon us giving you our 
support, and you may rest assured that 
wish to second you in the execution of the high task which 
has been entrusted to you. 


At four o’clock on the same day I visited the Count de 
Martel on board the cruiser Propence. 

On October 8th I invited the members of the Mission to 
dinner, After dinner I mingled with m 
brilliantly lighted and decorated with flowers and the resplen- 


dent uniforms 


conversation. I went up to General Dragomirov. “Well” he 
suid, “we are about to set out on the highroad.” 


I forced myself to give him a pleasant answer, but my 


I replied to th ` 
Caz pag ¢ Count de Marte} 


ACROSS THE DNIPPER * 
speech in the following 


conspiracy over- 
and forced the 


most whole-hearted 
we most sincerely 


y guests. The hall was 
of the guests; it hummed with animated 


thoughts were far away, out in Northern Taurida, where out 
fite was being decided. Amongst all this brilliant merry-making, 


gloomy forebodi 


clutched at my heart, 


On Ofober gth Admiral de Bon held a lunch in my honour 
on board the cruiser Provence, which was leaving the same day 
istantinople, Admiral de Bon was a charming old man 

and quite captivated me. He was Russia’s sincere riend, and 


mained 


— SO later when we were in exile, After lunch, M. 
Be, the co = had a long conversation with Admiral de 
unt 


Martel, and General Brousseau; we explained 


30 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


our Fes and our needs to them. The Admiral was goi 
Straight to Paris from Constantinople, and once there, e 
as to be able to get our most urgent needs satisfied, 

he negotiation of the loan was going on quite satis. 
faétorily in Paris. Maklakov telegraphed :— 


Struve wishes to inform you that on October 20th he was 
received by M. Leygues, President of the Council, and on the 
22nd by the President of the Republic, to whom he explained 
the financial situation and our plans for the loan. His attitude 
was very friendly, and there are great hopes of success. 


The transport-ship Rios was on its way to the Crimea with 
a cargo of warm clothes, ammunition, ctc., for the troops, 
It seemed that the long-awaited help was about to arrive 

at last, But was it not now too late? 

We received news from the front of the continual arrival 
of the enemy’s reinforcements. All the reserves at the disposal 
of the Red Command which could be transterred from the 
interior of Russia, Westem Siberia, or the Polish front, were 
now being sent southwards. The bands of the famous “Father” 
Makhno, who up till now had been “working” behind the 
Red lines, suddenly realized the possibility o dpe to be 
made from plundering the Crimea, and joined the Soviet 
troops. The enemy’s forces grew larger 8 The General 
Staff of the 4th Red Army, which had been beaten by the Poles 
at the battle of Warsaw, when some of its divisions had been 
interned in Germany, had arrived in Alexandrovsk from the 
western front. 

Nature herself seemed to be against us, An intensely cold 
set in, a most unusual thing for this time of the gor 
troops, who wese thinly clad, suffered appallingly trom 

the cold; many soldiers had frost-bitten limbs. The temperature 
fell yet lower. The troops dwindled away. 

At the same time as the Red Command was throwing all 
its available forces southwards, it was also taking measures to 
increase its p da work behind our lines. 

Lately, the Greens had redoubled their activity. There bad 
been a recrudescence of military espionage inspired by the 
Registration Bureau (“Registr 1 on the Caucasian front, 
which had its headquarters at Rostov on the Don. The 
R sent scouts into our midst under registration 
marks; numbers five and thirteen were stationed at Temtiuł 


7 1 


GENERAL WRANGEL 


zi 
z. On one 
* ordet t 

men Gad him- 


g “Ti 


apernts u 
The eT A mercile: 
mene against these att 
as] arove to upht 
Adee and its indef 
c administrative auth 


aht be, | 
An order published c 
iv independence of the | 


ind been, in the person ¢ 
m Navy, subject to the 
nd obliged to take its or 


PORTRAIT OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


ACROSS THE DNIEPER 901 


in the Kuban, and there were special numbers on the shores 
of the Taman peninsula. From Temriuk and by way of Taman 
the Red spies crossed the natrow Kertch Pass, landed on 
the Kertch peninsula, and set out for the Crimea; later they 
returned by the same route, 

In one month alone six Soviet spies were caught in the town 
of Kertch and its suburbs, and the liaison service which the 
Bolshevists had organized between our territory and the 
Tamanan Coast was discovered. In Kertch and the hamlet of 
Yurgaky (on the Sea of Azov) this service was preparing 
secret Stations l with signal. lights, spherical mirrors 
for signalling by heliography, and materials for chemical 
writing. On one of the spics we found, amongst other docu- 
ments, an order to “rouse Mokrohoussoy” with instructions 
how to find him. l 

Under the expert direction of General Klimovitch, our 
counter espionage service foiled cach of the enemy’s attempts. 
The cnemy agents who fell into our hands were court- 
martialled and mercilessly punished, I fought with all my 
might against these attempts at subyersion, yet at the same 
time I strove to uphold the authority of the machinery 
of justice and its independence from all representatives of 
the administrative authorities, however highly placed these 


ight be. 
ge order published on October oth definitely established 
the independence of the Military Jurisdiction, which until now 
had been, in the person of the Attorney-General of the Army 
and Navy, subject to the chief of the Military Administration, 
ind obliged to take its orders from the Ministry of Marine on 
questions concerning the fleet. 

Groups of the so-called Democratic Opposition”, filled 
with fumes which had been generated at the beginning of the 
Revolution, were still committing and defending the mistakes 
which had been committed in every phase of our struggle, 
Blind and obstinate in their defence of “the conquests of the 
Revolution”, which gave them an alluring semblance of 
Prestige and influence, these groups were inclined to regard 
ery measure which they did not initiate as a menace to these 
conquests”. These groups included some elective organi- 
muas (several Zemstvos and Municipalities), and aiso 
wue of the professional syndicates and the most consider- 

of the perative Unions—the Tsentrosoyouz and 


302 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


its branches—the Tsentrocektzi 

the Zdravsoyouz. sa ins Dnieprosopou, 
From the very first days of the March Revo)»: N 

organizations had made a rule of recruiting chen nen hy 

amongst those who had served a tem in Staffs 

politics. Therefore the great majority of their chene 

were packed with elements which understood Bol ations 

semi-Bolshevist ideas, however much they camou 

3 than the r of the Russian Army, whi them, 
0 rinciple of military dictatorshi 

in its icht to the te PAS AD ALC 0 Sacer 
These groups did not hesitate to give surreptitious 


interests. 
In this connection the activity of the T 

its branches merits special mention. In 1919 it 
proved by documentary evidence that when the Volunteer 
Army was occupying Odessa, Kiev, and Kharkov, the 
Tsentrosoyouz, the Tsentrocektzia, and the Dnieprosoyouz 
had been in communication with Soviet Government, 
received subsidies from it, and carried out its orders, suppl 
the Red Army and the provinces of Northern Russia 
materials and provender. An examination of the accoum- 


se 

Russia had been found in the Tsentrosoyouz's local depots. 
Amongst the other co-operative organizations, the Tsentro: 
cektzia (Workmen’s Co-operative) the Dnieprosoyouz, and 
the Zdravsoyouz enjoyed the special favour of the Soviet 
Government, and had received important subsidies from the 
Soviets for putting themselves at their service; for this service 
they had used their branches on the territory occupied by the 


Russian Army! i 

A “General Plan of Work for the Year 190r — = 

tember 1920 during a police-raid on the Tsentrosoyow 

at Kertch, will serve as a specimen of the Isen 

ouz’s activities in the Crimea in the interes. 
This plan had been sent to the office at Kertch by M. Dove 

I, P anager of the Tauridan counting-house of the ren 


Ae = FT Se ra 2. a 


ACROSS THE DNIEPER 05 


soyouz, and was followed by a letter from M. Vonov, a director 


of the southern section of this organization; it mentioned the 
following achievements :-— 


1. Buying up of raw materials and sending them untouched 
to the northern provinces and abroad. 


2. Preparation of semi-manufafured goods and sending 


them to the north to be finished in the Tsentrosoyouz's 
factories, 


§. Production of manufactured articles 
into Northern Russia. 


and sending them 
Some goods had been sent to Northern Russia by way of 
gatoum and Georgi, and some by a ruse; merchandise would 
de accumulated in localities which it was believed that the 
volunteer Army was about to evacuate; then the abandoned 
would be sent immediately to Soviet Russia, credited 

the branches of the Tsentrosoyouz. 

to A Soviet law of March 20, 1920, had changed all the 
rative Organizations pA “pi PARIA into 8 

: ive organizations”. The central organization of the 
— — had come andar thts law. It had 
transformed into a central organ for the provisioning of 

viet Russia. Naturally the owners of the Tsentrosoyouz had 
re iven up their capital and independence with a good grace, 
ve ea had been compelled to do so by sheer force and other 
ait of repression. For some time the co-operative 
ization abroad (the Inocentre), which was in London, 

ra the management of MM. Berckenheim and Salheim and 
Mme. Lensky, was the only branch to keep its independence 

besides the branch in the Crimea. 8 
it would have been natural under these conditions if the 
Inocentre in London had Seay with the Russian amy 
the total absorption of the co-operative organiza- 
r Bolshevists. Nothing of the kind had happened. 
On the contrary, when the Soviet delegation led by Krassin, 
Noghin, and Razumovsky had arrived in London, Bercken- 
beim had communicated with them and offered his good 

offices to obtain a commercial treaty for Soviet Russia. 

This last action unmasked the Tsentrosoyouz’s real policy 
it moment when its Crimean representatives were assuring 
the South Russian Government of its devotion to our 


304 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 

These tendencies explain the hostility which 
soyouz showed towards us in all its “nop = Tsentro, 
activities, to which this organization devoted five merci 
of its capital. These “non-commercial” aétivities °° 
consisted of organizing libraries and conferences and uch 


books and pamphlets, had been developed on quite 4 a 


scale 


In later days, when we had been compelled to lea 

country, sorted the men who had been in charpe of oe 
South Russian branch of the Tsentrosoyouz, and had played 
an important part in politics, were to be found amongst the 
members of the Soviet Mission to Constantinople, while 
others of their colleagues in the Tsentrosoyouz took Potts as 


Soviet representatives in Trebizond, Zunguldak, and even 
London. 


On September 25th the activities of these people were 
investigated. The houses of several of them were raided, which 
caused a veritable panic. The leaders of the Opposition in the 
municipality of Sebastopol, with the Mayor of the town, a 
Revolutionary Socialist, at their head, drew up a memorandum 
and sent it to the French High Commissioner; it was one long 
calumny, and was intended to discredit the South Russian 
Government in every way in the eyes of the French representa- 
tive. The facts cited in the memorandum were either distorted 
or entirely fictitious. 

In spite of all the precautions which these traitors took, 
S of this memorandum, I made up 
my mind to put an end to this game whilst it was sill in its 
early Stages. 

A Press Congress was to be held in Sebastopol on October 
goth. A group of journalists asked me for an interview in 
connection with it. I took the opportunity to tell them how 
important the recognition of France was to us in our present 
circumstances, especially now that Poland had signed the 
peace. I pointed out that we could rely on help from France 
only if her Government was convinced of the justice of our 
cause; and I expressed my indignation at this document, 
which was the work of Russian men who put their personal 
or party interests before the common cause, and were base 
2 to serve the enemy endeavouring to destroy forei 


in us, In p of my es, I showed the 
journalists the memorandum which the Mayor of Sebastopol 


and others had sent to the French. I saw that they were 
sincerely indignant. Aide 
By the next day the shameful Story had gone all ro . 
town, rousing general indignation 7 ew the Mayor an 
several of the municipal councillors. The Mayor attempted to 
offer me his “explanations”, but I refused to receive him, 
He bowed to public opinion, resigned his mayoral office, and 
left Sebastopol. 555 
The Don Cossacks were holding their “Krug” t at Eupatoria, 
went over there with Count de Martel, at his invitation, to 
grtend the sitting on October 14th, 
In my reply to the president’s address of welcome, I again 
¢ a short reference to the possibility of a “temporary” 
retreat of the Army towards the isthmuses. After the sitting, 
che members of the Krug invited us to dinner at the Hotel 
Jer. In reply to the Ataman’s address, the Count de Martel 


made a long speech :— 


Gentlemen, I am indeed happy to be in your mid at this 
grave and decisive moment in the life and destiny of your 
country. France has ever been Russia’s friend, and now it 
grieves her deeply to see your rich and beautiful country 
ruined by the violence of a handful of individuals, 

France has never compromised with the Bolshevists. She 
has always been at the head of the world-wide anti-Bolshevis 
movement, and she greets General Wrangel’s accession to 
power with delight, for he has undertaken to weld together all 
those men who wish to continue the struggle and defend the 
rights of the Russian people in spite of innumerable difficulties, 
France realizes that although the war against Germany has 
been brought hat a É rara conclusion, there will be no 
general peace until there is in Russia, and Bolshevism, 
which was imported from — is swept from Russian 
soil. France realizes too that the Cossacks have always been 
in the vanguard of the Civil War, and that they will continue 
this fight agains the enemy, however difficult and murderous 
it obs ou are fighting to save millions of Russian men 
who have been coudemned to death; a handful of men whose 
one unparalleled in all the annals of history will dispose 

them mercilessly, as they would ruin the Crimea to-morrow 
nR not defended by such a vigorous Commander-in-Chief, 
ae . Without fear and without reproach”, who is en. 

with the task of keeping order and peace, and of 


' Krag” = ca Regional P li t 


306 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
safeguarding the rights of every citizen, I wi 
that your land. which is ill occupied by U 
sce the realization of its hopes. You hay 
sane course—that of union. Another effort, and you wi 


your goal; you will achieve peace for the Don = teach 
i Jour 


the best wishes of France, and fraternal greetings 1 Fou 
friends and allies, who will spare no effort to come to f 
help wherever it is possible for them to do so, your 


In the evening we left for Sebastopol. 

On October 13th the enemy had begun to cross the Dni 
near Nikopol. Fighting was also in progress on other seitas 
of the front. 

On October 15th the Reds launched a general offensive all 
along the front. 


eae a a ge a 


O E IT Ff ise 


CHAPTER X 
THE LAST VENTURE 


Tre total number of Red troops on the southern front was 
something like fifty-five to sixty thousand bayonets and 
rwenty-two to twenty-five thousand sabres, counting onl 
combatants; the complete figure, including formations behind- 
the-lines, reached six hundred thousand men. 

The proportion of the Red troops to the Russian Army 
was at [east three or three and a‘half to one. The Red Com- 
mand’s plan of campaign provided for the application of 
“pincers to the sven force of the Russian Army, and a 
sudden irruption into the Crimea by way of the isthmuses. 

I forestalled the Red Command's plans, and, collecting an 
stacking force, I launched an operation consisting of con- 
secutive attacks at the enemy’s main body ; my attacking force 

euvred on the operative lines in the interior. 

When I reached the front, General Koutepov’s and General 
units were fighting for the third day in succession. 
The weather was colder than ever; there had not been such 
frost in the Crimea for dozens of years, The number of its 
victims increased daily. 

thes that came to 
geives in @raw underneath their shirts. 

In spite of the real gallantry of our troops, the mer) of 
Corps was driven back from the banks o the 


Arm 
the 1% y — the enemy set foot on the left bank and began 
ush southwards. On October 15th the units of the and 
op s had also been driven back by the enemy’s troops 


Anny Corp 
ch emerged from the armed camp at Kahovka. We had 
which eee F E from this direction. 


Aing the principal attack to come 
ee ee of > — of October 16th, the temperature 
fell ta fourteen degrees below zero. 1 thick ſog << as 

i uid be distinguished a few steps ahead. un tie 
— A e 2nd Army Cops hard 


evening a dispatch arrived from th : 
by the enemy, the units were retreating to erekop. 


large masses of Red cavalry had turned the right wing of the 
ar — Corps and were advancing rapidly towards the east. 
397 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


308 
& Red Cavalry Army had thrown all its 
— s and was Striving to cut off their eine behing 
Crimea., In the meanwhile, General Koutepoy was INO th. 
time. I sent him a wireless order to march on Salk Mark 
speed, and do his utmost to check the enemy troops whew 
penetrated our lines at Sivache. All the same, it was clear 
the enemy would reach the isthmuses before Genera] thar 
pov’s troops could arrive, The enemy were on the mart 
were not meeting a single obstacle; they could be erod 
at Salkovo on the evening of the r7th. T fortified Na 
which guarded the N rare to the Crimea were garris ons 
only with very small look-out patrols. The Red troops ri 
casily seize the Salkovo Pass at one bound and cut of dl 
communications between our Army and the Crimea, Je Was 
absolutely urgent that we should occupy the Salkovo Pass, 
During the night of the r6th I ordered General Abramoy 
ta send the . division which was concentrated a 
Melitopol to Salkovo, under cover of armoured cars. But the 
railroad was blocked, and the movement was carried og 
very slowly. The temperature fell to twenty degrees below aero. 
The water froze in the pumps at the Stations, for they were not 
constructed to Stand such intense cold. The echelons were held 
up on the march, One hour of anguish succeeded another, 
I had no troops at my command—the entrance to the Crimea 
was open to the enemy. During the day of the 17th I sent 
everyone who could bear arms to Salkovo—the Simferopol 
Military School, the Artillery School, and my own escort. 
I sent to Feodossia for General Fostikov's Kubanian units, 
even though he had not yet had time to reorganize them. 

At twilight, the Red cavalry units came up to Salkovo and 
discharged a fusillade at our meagre units, At nightfall the 
Red cavalry dismounted and attempted an attack on foot, but 
were repulsed by our rifle and artillery fire, 

During the night I managed to establish wireless com- 
munications with Saen Koutepov. I ordered him to quicken 
his movements as much as possible, get into touch with the 
units of the and Army, which was retreating along the line of 
the railway, take the command into his own hands, Strike at 
the enemy in the north, and try to check them at Sivache. 

On the morning of the 18th, General Abramov's cr 
came up from Rykovo Station and came to grips P 
enemy. Towards midday General Koutepov's units came up 


F FFI ABST TR 2B wwr e e ra 


THE LAST VENTURE 309 
from the west. The position of “Comrade” Boudenny’s 
cavalry could have —.— very serious, for it had been 
driven back from the north-cast and the north on to the 
semi-frozen salt marshes of Sivache. General Abramov’s 
infantry units threw themselves with all their strength upon 
the enemy, who were not expecting an attack from this side. 
Boudenny’s cavalry were taken unawares whilst the regiments 
were resting in the ee and the horses were unsaddled. 
‘The Red cavalry dashed about in utter disorder. The squadrons 
formed up hastily and rushed about in all directions, passi 
between our infantry units. One of the enemy’s batteries wit 
all its equipment and a great deal of transport fell into the hands 
of General Gusselchtchikov’s Cossacks. The way into the 
Crimea was Still open to our ror fin 

If General Koutepov had acted more energetically, the fine 
fower of the Red cavalry, “Comrade” Boudenny’s Army, 
would have suffered the fate of Jloba’s cavalry. But the success- 
ful beginning of this offensive bore almost no fruit. Our troops 
had no base, they were surrounded on all sides by the enemy, 
and were Still shaken by the hardships they had endured; as 
a result, they fought but spiritlessly. The officers themselves 
no longer manifested their former bold assurance. The main 

of the Red cavalry was able to file off eastwards without 
hindrance, and outstrip General Koutepov’s cavalry. 

On October zoth, General Abramov’s troops were fighting 
in the Pass. Later on, General Koutepov’s units came up, 
closely followed by the Red cavalry. 

The decisive battle in Northern Taurida was over. The 
enemy had become master of all the territory we had taken 
from them during the summer. An enormous amount of 
booty had fallen into their hands: five armoured trains, 
eighteen guns, nearly a hundred wagon-loads of shells, ten 
million cartridges, twenty-five locomotive engines, several 
trains loaded with provisions and ammunition, and nearly 
two million pos of corn from Melitopol and Guenitchesk. 
Our troops had suffered heavy losses, many had been killed, 
wounded, or frozen. A large number of prisoners and stragglers 
were in the hands of the enemy: the lers were most! 
the soldiers of i 

„ers of the Red Army whom we had incorporated into 

holen ** different times, Th everal f 

wholesale surrenders a arog Te Were 8 cases O 
division pave — * a whole battalion in Drozdovsky’s 

up. But the Army as a whole was Still 


n MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


intact, and our troops in their turn had taken fifteen p: 
nearly two th i n ateen b 
— ousand prisoners, and many rifles and — Gian 

The Army was intact, but its ſighting- power 
what it had been. Could this — te x aek our kong er 
for support, and withstand the enemy’s attacks? Six mages 
intensive work had resulted in the erection of fortificar? 
which made it very difficult for the enemy to enter the Can 
trenches had been dug, barrages of barbed wire erected, “ieee 
artillery emplaced, and machine-gun posts construed 7 

All the technical equipment in the fortress of Seba Stopol 
had been put in use. The branch-railway which had been 
extended to Yuchun made it possible for our armoured trains 
to keep the approaches to the fortifications under fire, The 
atmour-plating, the dug outs, and the huts for the troops were 
the only things Still unfinished. Lack of manual labour and 
wood had delayed the work. The intense cold, which had 
set in exceptionally early, had given rise to a parti 
unfortunate situation, because our line of defence lay alo 
a practically uninhabited area, so that the question of billets 
for the troops became extremely acute. 

In the very first days after Poland had signed the peace, 
when I had first decided to risk a battle in Northern Taurida, 
I had foreseen the possibility of an unfavourable issue, and 
bad visualized the probability of the victorious enemy invading 
the Crimea on the heels of our troops. However strong a 
position may be, it is bound to fall if the spirit of the troops 
who are defending it is broken. 

Therefore, I had at the time ordered General Chatilov to 
verify the plan of evacuation which the General Staff had 
drawn up in co-operation with the Admiral of the Fleet. This 

lan had provided for the evacuation of sixty thousand men. 

had ordered the figure to be altered to seventy-five thousand 
men, and had direéted that the coal and oil needed to complete 
our reserve supplies of fuel should be delivered immediately 
from Constantinople. +> 

As soon as our retreat into the Crimea seemed inevitable, 
I had ordered ships to be ed immediately in the ports 
of Kertch, Feodossia, and Yalta to embark thirteen thousan 
men and four thousand horses. I had explained away = 
measure as a preparation for a raid on Odessa, the objet 
which was to join the Russian troops operating in the Ukrane 


/ > 


a. 4% i 


To mask my real intentions even more completely, I did 
everything to substantiate the rumours that a raid was to be 
made. The General Staff was ordered to spread the rumour 
that a landing in Kuban was being planned. 

The number of troops to be mentioned was chosen in 

roportion to our effective forces in such a way that even 
those who knew the exact number of our troops could not be 
suspicious. I ordered the ships to be loaded with provisions 
and ammunition, 

Having in this way secured a certain quantity of free 
tonnage in the port of Scbastopol, I could, in case of mis- 
fortune, very quickly embark forty to fifty thousand men in 
the principal ports (Sebastopol, Yalta, Feodossia, and Kertch), 
and under cover of the retreating troops save the women, 
children, wounded, and sick entrusted to my care, 

On the evening of the zoth Gencral Koutepov came to see 
me. Although he was outwardly calm, his words betrayed his 
anxiety, Amongst other things, he asked me if I had prepared 
for a possible misfortune, My answer obviously reassu red him, 
On the 218, General Abramov artived. I consulted the two 
Amy Commanders, and on the 22nd I issued an order to 
the troops entrusting the defence of the Crimea to General 
Koutepov and amalgamating the Command, putting it 
entirely into his hands. 

During the night of the 22nd I left for Sebastopol. The 
slightest panic behind-the-lines would spread to the troops; 
this had to be avoided at all costs. Immediately I arrived, I 
summoned the Press agents and gave them a general explana- 
tion of the situation. 

On the evening of the 22nd there was a sitting of the South 
Russian Government, I pras I gave a detailed report of 
the arent fighting, and pointed out the difficulty of our 

situation owing to the enormous numerical superiori 
of the enemy. I dwelt upon the particular di i ry 
Pon the parti difficulties of the 

troops and the population in the besieged Crimea, and th 
intensive work which would be neces : 
the same time I assured th sary on our part; at 
senp of nakres. em that we would defend the lag 
acid rt and that, once we were rested, re-equipped, 
hinian o ¢ would attempt to wrest victory from the 


My * . 
Was quict behind-the-lines, ——— 


gre MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


the Perekop lines to be Eee On October 26th, a 
ference of representatives from the towns met at Simf 
and adopted a resolution approving: the policy of the ro! 
Russian Government and promising it whole-hearted gu uth 
A Press Congress was to meet in Sebastopol on Octoben Port, 
Life was going on as usual. The shops were crowded wi 
customers, the theatres and cinemas were packed. th 

On October 2sth, one of our military societies organized 
a musical evening in aid of some charity. I accepted an invita. 
tion to attend it, burying my desperate anguish deep in my 
breast, for I thought that my absence from such a 
organized as it was by a regimental society on whose book? 
I figured, would give rise to panicky comments. I remained at 
the concert until eleven o’clock, listening to the music without 
hearing it, and making a great effort to say a friendly word to 
a wounded officer or pay a compliment to one of the ladies 
who had organized the affair. 

Our troops had completed their regrouping. The intense 
cold had frozen over the salt marshes of Sivache, and our 
line of defence was therefore considerably lengthened. The 
lack of housing accommodation and of fuel increased the 
number of victims of the cold. I ordered all the reserve 
supplies of clothing that could be found in our depots to be 
distributed amongst the troops. 

At this moment, the large transport-ship Rion arrived with 
winter clothing for the troops, but it was too late. 


. - ee Ze oe ~ tah e h 


CHAPTER XI 
INTO THE UNKNOWN 


On the evening of October 26th I was presiding at a meetin 

of the Government, when an orderly came into the room an 
handed General Chatilov a Hughes telegram from General 
Koutepov. After he had read the message, General Chatiloy 
Fade it to me, General Koutepov reported that the enemy 
had penetrated our lines below Perekop and were now 
tening to surround us; therefore he had been compelled 
order a general retreat to our second line of fortifications, 
‘either the matter nor the manner of this message left room 
doubt that we were on the brink of disaster. I pretended 
t I had to speak to Generl Koutepov on the telephone, 
jelegated the chair to M. Krivochein, and went into an adjoin- 
u room. General Chatilov followed me. It was as clear to 
© as it was to me that the troops were er per of offering 
bu farther resistance; the Army’s stock of endurance was 
155 overdrawn, and no fortifications could check the enemy 


for 


on were to be rescued, I sent for Admiral Kedrov, 
was at the meeting in the other room, and in a few words 
{ described the situation to him. 

An involuntaty exclamation escaped the Admiral. 

“My God! why did I accept this burden?” he cried. 

But he quickly regained his composure. He had tonnage at 
his command for sixty thousand men. The additional coal and 
ail reserves had just arrived from Constantinople: this made 
it posible for us to increase our tonnage and bring the 
mmber of men we could embark up to seventy to seventy- 
fve thousand, We had not the tonnage for a greater number 
tun this. I ordered every vessel capable of putting out to sea 
o be utilized. I demanded the immediate return from Con- 
PEF of every ship that could be mobilized. Finally, 
Had all the foreign trading-vessels in the Crimean ports 
keine so that we could use their tonnage also, 


M. Kri , who had a presentiment that disaster was 
313 


“tse measures were necessary if the Army and the 
ati 


a4 g MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
in the air, now came out of the counci 
uncil chamber. H 
; - ‘ T. EE 
mo — We strove to calm him, and assured him th bly 
P si 9 had been taken in anticipation of err 
begged him to reassure the other members of the Gover,’ 
Vety- 


meee as ne 4s he could. le 
or myself, I decided to set out for the 
of the situation, I left at three o'clock ar Ota ake tad 2 
reached the front just as day was drawing in. Geleni N and t0 4 
and his chief-of-staff entered my compartment at Simf met 117 
Since the command of the Crimean troops had been etopol, | go 
and put into General Koutepov’s bends, the and heme ae 
General Staff had been stationed in Simferopol. y's 11 r 
= When I reached Djankoy, I at once received General pasti 
outepov, who explained the general situation to me. {peat 
Our troops had been forced to retreat to our last line of I N 
8 = th 
eneral Koutepov still intended to attempt a cduntet- 
attack the next morning, and win back our loa | lines, but he aTi 
had very little faith in our chances of success. According to aor. 
him, the spirit of the troops was broken. The best of the En 
superior commanders were out of action, and it was impossible Ak 
to count on success. I agreed with him absolutely; neverthe- acht 
less, I insisted that we must hold the lines at all costs, so that F 
we might at least gain the five or six days which were neces- egi 
sary for loading up the fuel, distributing the ships between 215 
the different ports, and embarking the interior organizations r 
and the sick and wounded from the hospitals, etc. General treded 
Koutepov promised to do his utmost, but his answers made e e 
me realize he despaired of the troops being able to hold ree 
11 


the lines. 
The storm was approaching; our fate was hanging by a tiy 
thread; we had to Strain every moral and intelle force. n 
The slightest irresolution, the most insignificant mistake, and iy 
all would be lost. The first essential was to k order in y 
Sebastopol. There were almost no troops Stationed there. My ten, 
escort, which had been on guard in the town, had been sent Ñ 
a few days previously to the Yalta section, to settle with N7 


“Comrade” okrohoussov’s Greens who had been driven 


into the mountains. I telegraphed for a company of pupils y 
3 military school to be sent to Simferopol Station to è 


INTO THE UNKNOWN 31 


At Simferopol I received the -governor and explained 
the situation to him. I ordered — bramov to tor all the 

iminary measures for the evacuation of the military and 
civil administrations in Simferopol, the officers and pupils of 
the military schools, the sick, and wounded, the families of the 
officials, and anyone else to whom the arrival of the Bolshevists 
would be a * menace. All the preliminary measures were 
to be carried out secretly as far as was possible, in order to 
¿void premature disturbances, I promised that the evacuation 
order Should be sent the moment it was needed, and that a 
sufficient amount of rolling-stock should be put at the disposal 
of the Simferopol authorities. 

At nine o clock on the morning of October 28th, I reached 
sebastopol with an escort of pupils from the military schools. 
j went Straight from the station to the Palace: I summoned 
M. Krivochein, General Chatilov, and Admiral Kedrov, and 

ve them their final instructions. I ordered that the public 

dings which housed the postal and telegraphic services 
Held be occupied by the troops, and that patrols should be 
astioned at the railway Station and on the quays. I made 
arrangements for the disposal of the tonnage; ships 
e of cartying twenty thousand men were to go to 
ch, thirteen thousand to Feodossia, ten thousand to Yalta, 
renty thousand to Sebastopol, and four thòusand to Eupa- 
pia I gave instructions for the order of e 
de interior organizations were to go, then the sick and 
sounded, then supplies of provisions and the most valuable 
d the equipment. Thus, when the order was given, the 
embarkation could begin immediately. 

At ten o clock I received the French High Commissioner, 
the Count de Martel, and the representatives of the other 
foreign Missions—Admiral MacCully, Colonel Walsh, and 
Major Takahashi; I begged them all to interrogate the 
representatives of their Governments at Constantinople on the 
question of assistance for us from foreign ships, for we would 
wed it if it came to an evacuation and we were obliged to 
kave the Crimea. 

1 an day I invited representatives of the Russian and 

ess to call, and explained the situation to them; the 
am which was Bghting not only for the honour and liberty 

m owa country, but for the common cause of culture and 
‘vitation throughout the world, the Army which had just 


116 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


stayed the bloody hand which the butchers of Moscow ha 
raised against Europe, was now abandoned by everyone d 
at the end of its tether. A handful of heroes, halfnakes 
Starving, and exhausted, was continuing to defend the a, 
Strip of native soil. Our resources were y Bak — away — 
every day it was possible that we would be driven into the 
sea. We would hold out until the bitter end, protecting those 
who had sought refuge behind our bayonets. I had taken the 
necessary measures for the evacuation of all those who would 
be threatened with murdcrous reprisals. I had the right to 
hope that the nations by whose side our Army has fought for 
a common cause, would not refuse hospitality to unfortunate 
refugees. 

de alarming news spread through the town with the speed 
of lightning. The telephone never ceased from ringing, nor 
people from calling at the Palace, to ask for information on 
the situation. 

Late at night some news came through from the front: 
that morning our units had begun a counter-offensive and 
had seized the positions they had abandoned the night before; 
but they had not been able to maintain them for — They 
had fallen back on to their original position, hard-pressed by 
the enemy’s larger forces. Our reserves had dwindled away. 

ing the day the Reds had brought up reinforcements and 
followed up their advantage; by the evening they had wrested 
the last line of fortifications from our troops. 

The situation had become critical. The hours still left to 
us for the completion of our preparations for the evacuation 
were n . The work was going forward rapidly. Coal 
was being loaded day and night; gangs of non-combatants 
were formed, recruited from amongst the members of the 
administrative bodies, etc., to help the coal-heavers. Provisions 
and water were being loaded on board with all speed. The 
transport-ships were making for the ports which had been 
assi to them. ‘The General Staff and the administrative 
were working very hard, sorting out the archives and 
packing up the records. 

At two o'clock in the afternoon, the French cruiser Waldick- 
Rousseau arrived from Constantinople, escorted by a to 
boat. Admiral Dumesnil, temporary Comman 
French Mediterranean Squadron, was on board. He and the 
Coant de Martel called on me, and the Admiral impressed 


INTO THE UNKNOWN $17 

favourably ; he was a man of strong will and unshak- 

able acbility of aad. Our interview lasted two hours; the 
conclusions we reached are summarized in the 3 letter 


which the Admiral sent me: it is dated Octobet aqth- Novem- 
ber r1th:— 
Light Division, On board the Walderk-Rowtstan, 
cear-Admiral, November 11, 1920. 
No, 9. Am. REAR-ÄDMIRAL DUMESNIL, 


Commandant of the Light Division, 


To Hrs Excerrency GENERAL WRANGEL, 
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of South Russia. 


DEAR GENERAL, 
I have the honour to communicate to Your Excellency 


a summary of our interview of to-day’s date, and to request you 
to endorse it, so that ] can be sure that it is correct before 1 
submit it to the French Government: 

Your Excellency regards the situation at the front as hope- 
less, and sees no other solution than to evacuate the whole of 
the civil population desirous of fiecing from Bolshevist re- 

isals, together with the remnants of the White Army, 
wounded or able-bodied, You ask my help in accomplishing 
the evacuation, for it cannot be effected completely without the 
protection of the ships which are under my orders and the 
help of several French transports or tugs. 

Your Excellency considers thar if France will not promise 
you transport, and junction with the Army on the Russo- 
Polish front (should she promise this, you are ready to con- 
tinue the Struggle on this theatre of war with the cvacuated 
troops), your troops must cease to play a military rôle. You 
ask for help and assistance from the French Government for 
them as well as for all the civil refugees; the provisions they 
are taking with them from the Crimea are rafficient for only 
twelve days, and nearly all the refugees are absolutely devoid 
of resources, 

The means which the Crimean Government have at their 
dsposal for meeting the expenses of the evacuation of the 
their maintenance, and their eventual settlement, 
include a fleet of warships and a fect of mercantile marine. 

are free from all financial burdens, and your Excellency 
. that they should be handed over immediately to the 
Government as security. 


Yours very sincerely, 


Dumesnt. 


<per spi - 


for Kertch. The heavy transport was to 
infantry was to pack into the wagons; 
co vet its retreat, 


At the same time I signed the order announc 
Population that we were about to leave ou 


ing to 
r native land we 


ORDER FROM THE REGENT or Sourn Russia anp THE 
CoMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE Russtan Ansty 


SEBASTOPOL, 
Ofober 29, 1920, 
People of Russia! Alone in its Struggle against the Oppressor, 
Russian Army has been maintaining an unequal contes 
in its defence of the last Strip of Russian territory on which 
Jaw and truth hold sway, 

Conscious of my responsibility, I have Heer to anticipate 

every possible contingency from the very beginning. 
I now order the evacuation and embarkation at the Crimean 


its road to Calvary ; that is to say, the families of the soldiers, 
the officials of the civil admini@ration and their families, and 
anyone else who would be in danger if they fell into the hands 
of the enemy. 

The A will cover the embarkation, knowing that the 
necessary ships for its own evacuation are ready and waiting 
in the ports according to a pre-arranged plan. I have done 
everything that human Strength can do to fulfil my duty to 
the Army and the tion. 

We cannot fo our future fate. 

We have no other territory than the Crimea. We have no 
money. Frankly as always, I warn you all of what awaits you. 

mlay God grant us Kren and wisdom to endure this 

of Russian misery, and to survive it. 
peri misery, G wann. 


2 


INTO THE UNKNOWN 519 


Simultaneously, a Government communiqué appeared :— 


Whilst proceeding with the evacuation of those of the 
officers, officials, and their families who wish to leave the 
Crimea, the South Russian Government considers it its duty 
to warn everybody of the severe ordeals which await those 
who are about to leave Russia, Owing to the lack of fuel, 
there will be severe overcrowding on the ships; the time 
spent on the sea and in the roadstead will necessarily be a long 
one. Furthermore, the future fate of the evacuated is quite 
uncertain, for up to the present, none of the foreign Powers 
have promised to receive them. The South Russian Government 
has no means of helping them, either during the journey or 
later on. All these considerations compel the Government to 
advise all those who will not suffer ditectly from the violence 
of the enemy to remain in the Crimea. 


The order and the communiqué were telegraphed to all the 
towns, so that the entire population might know their contents, 

Late on the evening of the 2gth, the last I of the 
Government took place under the presidency of M. Krivo- 
chein. On the morning of the zoth the embarkation of the 
many departments of the civil and military administration 
was to begin. M. Krivochein gave his final instructions and 
sailed for Constantinople on board the English cruiser Centaur. 
I urged him to speak to M. de France, the French High Com- 
missioner at Constantinople, and to secure his help in case we 
should arrive in the Bosphorus. At the same time I charged 
him to do all he could to organize help for the refugees who 
would arrive there, also to interest the Russian organizations 
in this work, and foreign institutions too, if possible. I was 
counting very largely on assistance from the American Red 
Cros 


5. 

I finished my work late that night and went to bed, but 
I was soon awakened. The Admiral of the Fleet had sent 
Captain Machukov, his chief-of-staff, to me. Our wireless 
Station had received a message from the Soviets: the Red 
Command that I should surrender; they teed 
the life and personal inviolability of every said of the 
cae Command, as well as of all those who would lay 
ae arms. I ordered all the wireless stations to be 
service,” Cept one where the officers were running the 


M 
J order and the Govemment’s communiqué, which had 


w" 


isà : — OF GENERAL WRANGEL 
been printed overnight, were posted up į 
Sebastopol on the morning of the zoth. P in the trees, 
The population was in the throes of violent ~ 
the drs few hours, but this soon subsided, Thee g. 
that authority was Kill in the hands of strong men 
not lost their heads, whose actions were deliberate . 1” had 
on a settled scheme; they felt that they could all —. based 
support of the representatives of authority, and tha „o È 
fusion would be nipped in the bud. Several persons hes con. 
attempting to create disorder by anarchistic acts wer, 3 
mediately arrested, and one of them, a soldier from a te im 
cal detachment, was court-martialled and shot two — se 
The embarkation of the staffs from the hospitals and the 
numerous administrations was proceeding in perfect 
Long Strings of wagons were winding along the Streets which 
were crowded with men carrying their possessions, The 
employees of the military authorities, followed by 
which had been organized with the help of the pupils from the 
military schools and the soldiers of my escort, were scouring 
the Streets, seeing that order was maintained among® the 
transport, and supervising the embarkation. All those who 
wished to leave had to notify the General Staff. The numbers 
were huge. Our calculations were exceeded by large numbers, 
and we realized that we had not nearly enough tonnage. 7 
It was not so cold now. The sea was dead calm, and Admini 
Kedroy decided to use ship and boat that would bold 
water, taking some in tow. În these difficult hours, when be 
was overwhelmed with intensive, feverish work, the Admiral 
iare rare organizing ability, and worked ceaselessly di 
and night, attending to ev ing himself, and demandisg 
the same amount of work from his subordinates. An enorman 
amount of work fell also to the General Staff; they too 


In the evening, a representative from the munici ity came 
a hen the, He te me to take measures in good f 
ensure the safety of the town, the factories co to tak? 


the artillery magazines after our departure. a servi 
charge of the supervisory work and to orga cave oF 
recruited from the workmen. I willingly Erkmen 


INTO THE UNKNOWN gat 
me. The Count consented to take everyone who left the 
Crimea under the protection of France. The French Govern- 
ment accepted the Russian tonnage as security for the money 
for the maintenance of the refugees. : 
On October 3 18t, an exchange of official letters on the subjeét 
took place: 
SEBASTOPOL, 
Odtoler 31f-November 13, 1920. 

At this moment, when circumstances compel me to leave 
the Crimea, I must consider if and how I can use my Army 
on the territories which are still occupied by the Russian 
forces which have recognized my authority, Whilst reserving 
to my troops their ultimate freedom of action for use when 
facilities have been granted for returning to our native land, 
I must take into account the faé that France was the only 
Power to recognize the South Russian Government and give 
it moral and material support; therefore I place my Army, my 
Navy, and all those who have followed me, under the pro- 
tection of France. 

I have issued an order to this effect to the different units 
of the military and mercantile fleet of Russia; I am sending 
you a copy of it with this letter. 

I regard these ships as securities for the payment of the 
expenses which France has already incurred or will in future 
incur in giving the help which our present circumstances 
make necessary. 

GENERAL P. WRANGEL, 


SEBASTOPOL, 
November 13, 1920, 

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter 
of to-day, in which you inform me that circumstances compel 
you to leave the Crimea, and that you must consider if and 
how you can use your Army on the territories which are 
— npied by the Russian forces which have recognized your 
au rity. 

Whilst you reserve to your troops their ultimate freedom 
of aétion for use after you are granted facilities for returning 
ie your native land. you take into account the fact that France 

only Power to recognize the South Russian Govern- 
— give it moral and material support: therefore you 
— Place your Army, your Navy, and all those who followed 

Yorn protection of France. 

YOu haya i. ent me vop? of the order to this effe& which 
* issued to the different units of the military and mer- 
Y 


322 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


cantile Russian flect; you add that 
securities for the payment of the expenses 
already incurred or will in future incur in * 
which yout present circumstances make necessary. © 
3 To 7. with Admiral Dumesnil, 3 
ren ect at Sebastopol, I have th of 
23 that, EE to subsequent —— to iaka 
ecision and the arrangements you s cept 
Government, Fame a of m 
Counr D 
Dosey. Mum 


I decided to spend the night of the 314 
Kist, near the Tsarskaia quay. The operative —.— * 
an Staff was there. ay 
was preparing to leave the Palace when I was 
the “Revolutionary Committee of the town of ae te 
wanted to speak to me on the telephone. I took up the receiver, 


he town is absolutely quiet. A nculy formed Revolu- 
tionary Committee has taken over power. The troops and all 
the citizens who wished to go have been embarked. The ships 
have put out to sea,” I was told. 

“Do you know anything about the Red troops?” I asked. 

“Nothing at all. There are no troops whatsoever in our 
town,“ was the reply. 

“Thank you for your information. Good luck,” I said. 

“Good luck,” was the answer. 


Towards midnight, a fire broke out in the warchouses of the 
American Red Cross. The population attempted to pillage 
them, but a detachment of my escort arrived on the spot and 
quickly restored order. The night passed without any other 


toward incident. 
Since the morning of October 31st, the echelons from 


Simferopol had been embarking in their turn. The wo 
were loaded on to the transport-ship Nala, which eee 
transformed into a hospital-ship. M. 8 
Health Department, was supervising every pre 
although he was so ill that he could hardly stand; phic 
receiving the wounded as they arrived and organizing 
i on the ship. a 
e ships Which had taken on board the administrative 
This confirmation was given later. —TRANSLATOR. 


Se fx ARFPRB2S FRSA BRASH meron ce 


aS 
„ 


Ate — y 


. 2 — — n 


INTO THE UNKNOWN 5 


bodies from Sebastopol the evening before, had put out to 
sea loaded to the utmost of their ca acity. Fortunately the sea 
was perfeally calm. The transport-s ps intended for the units 
of the 18t Army were in the bay. my orders they were 
uipped with sentries from the different units. Our Armies 
were continuing to retreat according to the orders they had 
ived at ten o'clock in the morning; the front was drawing 
gear to Sarabuz. During the retreat we scarcely came into 


tact with the enemy. 
Towards midday I walked through the town with my 
ide · de camp. The Streets were almost deserted, and most of 
shops were shut; now and then we met a straggling trans- 
wagon, or an isolated pedestrian hurrying towards the 
Pirbour. Everyone we met saluted me respectfully, as usual. 
| became more and more convinced that the embarkation 
uid be accomplished smoothly and that everybody would 


* in time. ; à 
a aal Koutepov and his General Staff arrived at twilight. 


me troops were retreating in perfect order. Those who wished 
emain behind had been preg full leave to do so, but only 
— few took advantage of this permission. General Koutepov 
ted that the embarkation would be finished by about 

en o clock in the morning. l 

t ordered the troops to occupy the line of fortifications 
hich had been used in 1855," in order to cover the embarka- 
jon. The Admiral of the Fleet was ordered to finish embarka- 
jon operations by midday on November 18. At one o'clock 
ig the afternoon the ships were to make for the roadstead. 

At ten o’clock on the morning of November rst, I went the 
mundo the ships in a motor-boat, accompanied by the Admiral 
of the Fleet. The embarkation was nearly finished. There were 
oy a few hundred men still on the quayside, waiting their 
tum As our motor- boat passed along, cheers rang out from 
the crowded ships and the —— ts and handkerchiefs 
we waved. My heart contra infully, and a wave of 
compassion, pity, and love for all these men who were so 

te my soul, 

` e ee retreated, and the pupils from the 
C tornspeop] wn up in the market · square. A crowd 
ted the ils fre waiting in front of the Town Hall. I 

Pups trom the military school and thanked them 


' During the Crimean War,— TRANSLATOR, 


tn MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


for their magnificent services, T saig. « 

shed its blood in great torrents a oh 
Russian cause but for the whole world g 
native shores, abandoned everybody, Y now leavin 
exile; we are not going as gears with Aske ree 
but with our heads held high, conscions Of havin 
duty to the end. We have ka right to claim bel ous 
who owe their continued freedom and even thei ftom those 
existence to us; we have sacrificed much for thet, Continued 

I gave the pupils from the military school the l 
embark, and made for my motor- boat. There Was a 1 to 

handkerchiefs in the crowd, and J saw that many peo — 
weeping. A young girl came uP to me. She was sobling a 
7 a handkerchief to her lips. 8 and 

4 bless you and keep you, Your Excellency,” she u; 

Thank you. Are you remaining here?” I asked, * 

“Yes. I have a sick mother, and I cannot abandon her,” she 
replied. 

“God bless you too,” J said. 

A group of municipal councillors approached, I was very 
much astonished to recognize some of them, especially as they 
were members of the Opposition. 

“You have spoken the truth, Your Excellency,” said one, 
“You can indeed leave here with your head held high, knowin 
that you have done your duty, Let me wish you a good 
ourney.“ 

i I shook hands and expressed my thanks, +. 
Admiral MacCully, the Chief of the American Mission, came 
up to me with a spontancous movement. He wrung my hand 
very heartily and said: 
“I have always been one of your admirers; to-day I am 
more so than ever.” 
The last of the sentries were embarked. At twenty minutes 


to three, my motor-boat left the quay ogy ee 


cruiser General Kornilov, which was fiying my 
of cheers went up from the crowded ships. 
The General Kornilov weighed anchor. One by one the ships 
put out to sea. Every that was watertight left the $ a 
of the Crimea. None were left in Sebastopol except 4 i 
useless tugs and old warships whose machinery AI che 
damaged Sat they could not used for tunen ood 
rest had been utilized. We cast anchor in Strieletzky Pay, 


N F. INK 


BE PERSS_ B22 SSB 


E 
- 


SE oes 


i 


O THE UNKNOWN $23 
remained there until half. past two at night, waiting until the 
last men in Strieletzky By had been embarked and the last 
ships had put out to sea. At last we weighed anchor and made 
for Yalta, which we reached at nine o’clock on the morning 


of November znd, 
The embarkation was already finished here. The tonnage 


had been found adequate, and everyone who wanted to leave 
had been embarked. Everything was quict in the town; the 
Streets were almost deserted. I went on shore with the chief- 
of-staff of the Fleet, and made the round of the ships, chatting 
to the officers and soldicrs. Our cavalry had kept the enemy 
in check, covering the infantry’s retreat; then they had broken 
sight away from the enemy and reached Yalta by forced 
marches. They had left the Red troops a long way behind 
them; the enemy were not expected to arrive before the next 
day at the earliest. I returned to the cruiser Genera/ Kornilov. 

Towatds midday the transports began moving, The crowded 
ships passed before me ; cheers filled the air. The Russian spirit 
is great, and the Russian soul unfathomable. 

At two o clock in the afternoon, we weighed anchor and 
made for Feodossia. Admiral Dumesnil was following us on 
board the cruiser Waldechk-Rousseau, escorted by a torpedo- 
boat, Shortly afterwards, we met the enormous transport. ship 
the Don; we were greeted with shouts and cheers; whil& we 
were Still a long way off we could make out the papakhas.t 

General Fostikov and his Kubanians were on board the 
Don. I ordered one of our ship’s boats to be launched and went 
over to the 8 The embarkation had been less 
successful at Feodossia, According to General Fostikov, the 


K. E 


s to the measures which he had taken. I returned to the 
cruiser 2 Kornilov and sent a wireless message to Kertch, 
tireding General Abramov to wait for and embatk the 


On rember ari, s nine ae in the morning, we 
roa outside Feodossia, We ve 
Vueless message from General Abramov ;— * 
i ubanian 1 troops have arrived; the embarkation 
Fur caps which the Cossacks wear.—Taanstator, 


axa Daw Bed 


116 MEMOIRS OP GENERAL WRANGEL 


The chief-of-staff of the Fleet left for Kertch on board 
ice-breaker Gaidemak, followed by the transport-shin po 
which had just arrived from Constantinople, and cha)! 
a party of troops on board in addition to its ordinary pa take 

The recent cold spell had broken. The welle wate 
once again; it was even quite hot in the sun. Ths bene fine 
clear as a mirror and re the transparent blue sky, Ga 
of white sea-gulls were wheeling through the air, and ih 
coast was enshrouded in a pink haze. 

At two o'clock in the afternoon, the Waldeck-Roy, 
weighed anchor and fired a salute of twenty-one * 
last salute to the Russian flag in Russian territorial water 
The General Kornilov replied to it. 

Shortly afterwards, we received a wireless message from the 
chief-of-Staff of the Fleet, who had gone to Kertch: 


Embarkation finished. Everyone on board to the lat soldier 


At twenty minutes to four, the Gaidamak teappeared. The 
embarkation had been carried out brilliantly. The troops which 
had been on barges had been transhipped to the Rassia and 
the ships had put out to sea." 

I felt an immense weight fall from my mind. For a few 
moments my thoughts escaped quite ened from the 
sad present and the uncertain future. God had me to 
do my duty. He would bless our journey into the unknown. 

I pave the order to make for Constantinople. 

General Kornilov received a wireless message from the 
Waldeck-Roussean:— 


To GENERAL WRANGÊL FROM ADMIRAL Dumesnit 
För the last seven months the officers and soldiers of the 
N ope under your 3 have given 1 
s id display of gallantry. They have fought an enemy ten 
F themselves, have Striven to 


and you have been compelled to leave your country. 
Hr the eu this hp hat co® you. But you uth fad 
some satisfaction in the knowledge that the evacuation has 


* One hundred and thousand six hundred and ninety-three men, pot 
See, Win tos coveption of denser fie usted e ae ar norm al De 
ships arrived safely at Constantinople. i 


INTO 527 
been conducted in an ex lary manner, The French Fleet 
which has given you its who hearted support, rejoices to see 
the evacuation so brilliantly terminated. Your aruggle has 


awakening and regenerating your country. I most sincerely 
hope that this awakening may come about as soon as possible. 
The Admiral, the officers, and the sailors of the French Fleet 
ce reverence to General Wrangel and pay homage to his 
valour. 


Soon afterwards, we intercepted another Soviet wireless 
message from Sebastopol to Moscow, urgently demanding 
that “experienced Propagandists” be sent at once, because 
there were none left in the Crimea. A striking testimonial 
ro General Klimovitch ! 

Night is falling. The stars are plcaming in the darkening 
sky; the sea is all a-twinkle. The onely lights on my native 
shore grow fainter, and then vanish altogether, one after the 
other. And now the last one fades from my Sight. 

Farewell, my country 


Ssnsskr-Kartovray, December 30, 1923. 


PART 11 


E WHITE ARMIES: IN 
TH 


RUSSIA 
AND LATER 


A Speech delivered by General 
ake s and e igi, 1215 
1927, 4S article is, by t i 
journal bere reprinted az tle fra pare te Newer 
Ar the end of the year 1917 the 8 of Kerensky 
could no longer retain the executive 
hands. It was seized by a set of people who built on the lowest 
sentiments of the populace, Operating as demagopues do, and 
omising peace and plenty with idleness none of these 
mises were kept. That did not matter to the Bolsbevist ring- 
eaders. Russia in its quality of a national State was no concern 
of theits. What they sought was a base whence to diffuse their 
unholy influence over the whole world. 

The moment that the Bolshevists laid hands on the executive 

wer, Russia, as a national entity, ceased to exist, Even the 
name which served to describe it disappeared. All the interests 
of the State, as such, were sacrifice to those of the Red 
International. Everywhere this International waged deter- 
mined war against every clement of the national spirit, 
aggravated class conflicts, and ena oy all the foundations of 
motality religion, the fatherland, the family. 

Yet, in spite of all, Russia Still exists as a nation. Immediately 
after the Bolshevists seized the reins of power, a few men, 
aired by love for their country and jealous for its greatness 
and glory, raised the national flag that had fallen in the mud. 
They Started in the south of Russia an implacable struggle 

inst the oppressors of their country. l 
iei appeal was heard; a crowd of officers, soldiers, 
Sudents, intellectuals, politicians, workers, and peasants 
focked to the Don. All those whose hearts were right and 
Coumgeous, and who could not admit that Russia was dead, 

under the national flag. There were men of every 
tks and condition of life, of the most varied ages and political 
ers olling themselves in the ranks of the National 


Enr 
they forgot every item of political or social divergence. 
33 


| olitical conference in 
“English Revi’ of Oflober 


wer in their feeble 


$32 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL à 


They were all united b 
ited by the same warm |] i 
and the same desire to sacrifice themselves for 75 


their cou 

Such, in November 1917, was wy, 
— was the incarnation of the rab ak per nn pi i 
8 Russian patriotism, United under the folds o tthe x revo 

ey fought from that time for the national cause This A our 
loyal to all the obligations taken over b previous my, 
governments, Still continues the struggle for the meiaes, 
country’s name, for the resurrection of Russia as a Nati = 
Its way of fighting has altered; the outward forms ae 
Repay belong to armies have gone; but the idea bie 
directed its making has remained untouched, 

What is this ea? It is life devoted to the fatherland, 
cagerness to save her at the expense of life itself, a passionate 
desire to tear the red flag down from the Kremlin and hoig 
in its place the National flag. | 

The struggle which began in the south of Russia soon raised k 
echoes elsewhere, in the north, the north-west, and Siberia, 
I will not pause here to tell you past history; I will only recall! 
the brilliant successes with which the White Armies began. 
The troops of General Denikin occupied a third of Russia ang 
advanced within a short distance of Moscow. In the north-west 
General Youdenitch was already in sight of the fires of St. 
Petersburg. In the west, Admiral Koltchak had almost reached 
the Volga. ; 

Yet Hory was not in reserve for the White Armies. The 
troops of the north were driven to the sea and forced to give 
up the territory they occupied. Some of them perished, while |% 
others were obliged to take refuge in Norway, In the north- k 
west the Army of General Youdenitch had to retire to Esthonian |z 
territory on which it was interned. The army of Aia 8 
Koltchak in Siberia had to fight in retreat and was In ti 
Finally, in the south of Russia the troops of General y 
retired t 


— ed into the 
o Novorossiisk. What was left 15 ao — 3 


* 


Crimea. After a year of heroic Struggle 


R 
2 
5 
Sh 
r 
5 
n 
1 * 
A 
5 
. 
= 
8 
p 
i 
S, 
„ 


4 =. + them 1 

reasons, and I will not w the read er by examinin of them. 
: ; to mentioning the 

detail. I will confine 7 “a o! d erate errors 


~ 
BE 


— 4 


A prominent place is 3 
leaders who did not sufficiently regard e A 
. — masses of the people. They exaggerated the impo N 


— — 


DoS 


m em Aa 
T E oaa T nAn ”țd n „ 
7 


Ew EFT >F ë FTyp 


— — did not think sufficient! 
about securing the pees They i 


the territories they occupi 
organizing them, raising new | o fill th 


f the people accounted for a pood 
deal. They had not Yet lost thei Tr ` 


ks of arms and munitions. 


c short of every- 
thing. During the fire months of the struggle the only arms 


On Were those taken from the 
nsable. It could only 
lan Atmy had fou he 
during the Great War. The White Armies who had refused to 
gnize the shameful peace of Brest-Litovsk and were loyal 
abei alliances thought they had the right to count on is 
rde Western Powers were far from realizing the essence 
the Bolshevist idea, the danger jr threatened to the world, 
of did not consider fairly the importance of the Struggle 
ag iré Army was carrying on. They did not understand 
tbe this Army, in fighting for its own country, was also 
that for civilization and the culture of Sa Not only 
che hie Armies fail to receive sufficient he p in time to 
dd f use, they had even on several occasions to run foul of 
. raised by the former Allies of Russia, 
It mus be noted that the English alone afforded material 
k ce to the White Armies. But this help was slow in 
—— and inadequate. Support in the shape of armed forces, 


uy i . : 

this happened without any previous warning. 
1 wis fhe loss of thousands of lives and immense 
kores left to plunderers. In the north-west the Fah lt. while 
they supported General Youdenitch and Promised him their 

combining at the same time in his rear with his 
pea thus giving them the chance at the decisive 
moment to sab — 


l the south, the French forces under General d'Anselme, 


334 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL 
town when the enem 37 he port of Og 
w e d y ap P roached. i essa, 
atning made the position of the Ruse: action S. 
2 desperate. Lastly, there mat 
anding over of Admiral Koltchak t be no ex 
Jana pace Hanz bid pur bee 
l $ protection. un 
immediately shot. ed over to the Bolshey; 
the spring of 1920 the Whi Armie 
north-west, and . had to — def Of the ag 
troops of General Denikin were thru& sa in the sou n. 
The British Government had up to this N to the Black Se. 
to General Denikin in the shape of 1 lene assistance 
Foreseeing the success of the Bolshevists, and = „munitions, 
that the time had come to pass from the — 15. m it 
4 e with the enemy of yesterday pa in arms to 
the head of the White Army to cease all hostilities * 

The Government of Mr. Lloyd George took upon | 
to enter into negotiations with the Bolshevis Go — 
concerning the amnesty to be granted to the White 
and the peoples of the Crimea. It threatened, if we on oy 
side refused, to deprive us of all assistance. 

At this moment our situation seemed desperate. The remains 
of the Armies which had fought in the south of Russia, after 
evacuating Novorossiisk, numbering about thirty-five thov- 
sand, had fled into the Crimea. It was no longer an Army, but 
a — crowd which had grown slack in its discipline and 
was morally and physically exhausted after a retreat for 
hundreds of miles in the height of winter, and a series of 
defeats. Munitions, arti Sores, and cavalry bad been 
abandoned at Novorossiisk for want of sufficient ships to carry 
them. Inthe north, the Crimean Peninsula was covered on the 


J@hmus of Perekop by weak detachments of no more, than 
five thousand five ended men, The Army found itself Were 
on to the sea, on a scrap of ground, lacking the ct OE 
revictual and fill up its losses in men. The Commander-in — 
General Denikin, was so broken by all this that he retired hf 
his duties. The post of Commander devolved on = and the 
reserved for me a heavy charge. While I fully net der the 
weight of responsibility that I was taking on, We 
difficulties in the grim conditions . Todo . 
J judged that I could not decline the post co promt 


SSeS PF RETEAB 328 WSs we wea ou... 


e z= 


. 


* 


a Oe eo Pete ae ae eee eo eee ees 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER 


539 
the Army victory; all I could do Was to promise it should 
come out of an almost hopeless position without loss of 
honour, 


In the answer I sent to the British Government I could not 
consider the Possibility of direct ne 


gotiations with the enemy. 
I left the initiative to Mr Lloyd George, and made Great 
Britain responsible for its decisions, 

Meanwhile I worked feverishly to restore the morale of the 
army and increase its f hting power. I wrote to Kin 
Alexander of Serbia, then eir to the throne and Regent, ad 
begged him to give my Army shelter 
at the 


English with the Bolsbevists led to no result. Th 
af che Soviets evaded all answer on the business 


ns with the 
to see hostilities 
to an end. It did not apparently consider that the result 
— be the sacrifice of thousands of lives. 


The Army was already pretty near reorg 
answered 2. threats in May 1920 b 


of the French Government. It declared its disapproval of an 
Iftoach to the Bolshevists and expressed its Tony wi 
my iing ead to a 98 
l of the intemational danger presented y 
et en Raat wished to create a stron Polish oe 
T Support against Germany. At the time w en 
tiie began between Poland and the Government of the 


336 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Soviets, France thought it necessar 
Armies, which might attra to theiz Pisa, F POrt the Whi 
Red forces. Later, M, Millerand, the French pf Ortion of the 
a public acknowledgment that the help which hed eet Mad. 
the White Armies had no other aim beyond oe 
Poland. It was said, particularly in an article that , ring 
the official newspaper, Le Temps, that France had Freire ic 
means to save Poland, and that one of these m * “Very 
establishment of a threat to the rear of the Bolshes, Was the 
which ~~ er rp a Se forces of General Wiang ss 
pressure brought to , , 
to ay Warsaw”. y General Wrangel’s forces helped 
e French Government was led by thes e 
recognize in June 1920 my de fatto 2 . e7 
tion had an especial moral effect, but France had not hee 
to bring materia] help of an effective sort into the fra we 
ever, it was this official recognition that enabled the 1 
receive a part of the Russian stores available since the Great 
ar in various countries. 

Fighting continued successfully in the south of Russia 
during all the summer and autumn of 1920, All the exertions 
of the Bolshevists proved futile. But N the defeat before 
Warsaw of the Armies of the Soviets, the egoistic and short- 
sighted policy of Mr. Lloyd George, then acting as mentor to 
the political world of Europe, had a new success. HoBilities 
were prematurcly suspended on the Polish front, and once 
more the Bolshevists were saved. 

Our Army was abandoned to its fate. 

It was evident that after the Armistice and the conclusion of 
the peace with the Poles the Bolshevists would direct their 
forces against the Crimea, and the White Army could not 
Struggle against such odds. What happened was that the 
Soviet Government concentrated on ni front occupied by 
my troops more than five hundred thousand men with all their 
cavalry. Exhausted by long months of incessant fighting, and 
weakened by all sorts of privations, the White Army was 
overwhelmed. To save the remnant of the troops aad the 
people who had put themselves under their protection, I 4* 
the order in October 1920 for retreat. The 4 7 fell back by 
forced marches on the seaports and embarked according to 


a plan previously arranged. The civil population, those * 


served in the rear, the sick and the wounded, women an 


T S&S ww Wee «es we a oe 


A TE a a a2 a2 ¢ men. 


children, were the first to be put on boards Theevacnation took 
acd in perfect order. I ins y on the cruiser 
ornilee the harbours used, and I was able to assure m 

ae all who wished to quit Russian soil found it possible to 

50. 

l Three years of determined Struggle, of fighting and suffer- 

ing, of heroism, victory, and defeat, followed by fresh victory. 

then came to an end. Ne left the last strip of the land of our 


fathers. 
In my order of the day concerning the evacuation I did not 


conceal the fact that our future fate was unknown to me, that 
we had no longer any Russian territory to move on, and that 
we had no resources left. I gave everyone full freedom to settle 
his own destiny. This order of the day, which warned everyone 
of the future to be fe an stopped nobody. From October 

ict to November 3rd one hundred and twenty-six ships left 
the ports of the Crimea, carrying one hundred and fifty thousand 
men who refused to live under the Bolshevist yoke. We left 
our country for the unknown, for privations, Sorrows, and 


ngs. 

The number of chose evacuated was one hundred thousand 
officers and soldiers and fifty thousand civilians, including 
among these thirty thousand women and seven thousand 
children. Of the one hundred thousand officers and soldiers, 

thousand belonged to the fighting troops, forty thousand 
to those who served in the rear. There were three thousand 
pupils from the military schools, and more than six thousand 
were ill, invalided, or wounded. The fifty thousand civilians 
included all ranks of society, amongst them peasants and 
workers; It was no emigration of privileged classes and pro- 
fessions. It was the exodus of National Russia with all the 
elements that go to make it, its civil organization and its Army 
These exiles cherished in their hearts profound faith in a 
victorious return to the land of their fathers, Of this crowd of 
émigrés it was the Army that from the national point of vi 
formed the most valuable part. It was the only group or view 
and consolidated by the blood all had shed’ the des tec 
shared. Its new existence showed that the fight for the he — 
of the country and the remaking of Russia as a nati onour 
not yet ended. It was evident that the Army ought t rk was 
the centre to gather round it the Russian lated ccs 9 Decome 
countries. It was indispensable to keep this nu 3 all 

Z * 


338 
Th ` ERAL WE ANG 
OR ia moment evacuation was oy a 
had | nted the High Command: er, the followin 
ad left the Crimea without 2 tc, 


them to grees arrangements his, fa 
a or hey ue 
them shelter: the countries which Wi 
. 8 — ert round this — or afford 
had tae pan in die gel, aging dg and of those 
peste fronts; and finally. the eee Bolshevists ee 
3 n 
— Te aom a tie Ama 
fifty thousand refugees — dbl ed in the one hundred and 
principal cae, composed ae sie into several groups. The 
gut into milita the military units, was portion 
+. as ty : twenty-five th ed 
lipoli; fifteen thousand at the i Und i ae 23 
sand at Tchataldja, in the nei hbo ie 8 
Finally 5 ghbourhood of Constantinople. 
R ra 3 2 8 ousand men were sent off to Serbia, 
distributed among 8 pine fos pir ten ete te 
vessels of the Russian Fleet with eal? coos 3 
five thousand men, were sent to Bizerte. The rer the 
civilian refugees were distributed in camps and barracks and 
8 he Sa of ee charitable organizations, 
, distribut intained 
my urgent request their — with ii —.— — 
and discipline. Realizing the importance of the preservation 
of order, of the maintenance of discipline and submission to 
regulations, the representatives of the French Government at 
Constantinople consented to the complete preservation 
asian ee and left the troops the use of their own 
arms and colours. 
But this state of things did not last long. Short-sighted 
politics, politics of a day-to-day sort, went on. This kind of 
litics, when dealing with old allies, was thoroughly immoral. 
e Powers of Western Europe yielded to the of 
fascinated by the success 


P . - u7 AS hm 
, E ot as bf 2. ern 
-Th —— — — — 


their crowds of workers, who were 

of their Russian comrades. They stopped all assistance © forces 

which had fought the Bolshevists. went further: they put 
tions with the Soviet 


themselves in the way of closer 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER 9 


Government. England o the ways Heap followed, and 
then France. In the last days of November 1920, M. Leygues, 
President of the French Senate, declared that “he was disposed 
fo authorize commercial operations between French and 
Russians, and that he did not think it necessary to continue 
the embargo ee the Russian Soviets.” “So far as the 
Government of General Wrangel is concerned,” he added, 
“the defeat of his Army being admitted, France . * herself 
as relieved of all obligations to him, and will on y assist his 
soldiers on humanitarian grounds.” Clearly, in these conditions, 
the Russian Army was bound to be considered not only useless, 
but even a nuisance, It offered, in fact, an exceptional case 
from the standpoint of international law, and formed an 
obstacle to the creation of relations and friendly ties with the 
group of Soviets. The results of this change of politics were 
soon felt, In January 1920, at Constantinople, General Charpy, 
der of the French troops in occupation, issued an 
order of the day that the principal thing to be considered at the 
moment was the evacuation of the military and civil camps as 
ickly as possible. The General indicated a series of measures 
to be taken for that purpose. In accordance with these directions 
the commanders of the French camps published in February 
notices encouraging the men to return to the Russia of the 
Soviets. It was explained that the French Government had 
tiken all the necessary measures to guarantee the safety of 
those who returned. At the same time the dwellers in the 
camps were warned that revictualling would shortly be cut off. 
In spite of the efforts I made to warn the men of the danger 
would incur if they returned to Russia, this threat to cut 
of their provisions induced something like one thousand five 
men to sign on the lists for repatriation, These were 
sent in the middle of February to Novorossiisk. Some time later, 
proposals were made to the Russian officers and soldiers that 
they should emigrate to Brazil as colonists of the State of 
Sin Paulo. They were promised on no particular . 
financial help and the grant of free concessions by the Brazili 
Government. On this occasion, thanks to my warnings, those 
Who signed were hardly any. Shortly afterwards it became 
= that the promises did not coincide with the facts ; all those 
alowed themselves to be caught were punished for their 
Rass trust. Those who, in spite of my advice, left for 
all sorts of trial s. Some of them were shot. 


340 MENOIRS OF 

T GENERAL WRANG 
hose who embarked for Brazil beca EL 
I — colonists. me slaves or tomer}: 

High iste hem in vain. In the middle of M 

Provisions their 7 — nde nt with threats — ine French 

choose one of 5 that the Russian refuges, bin 

Russia, emigration to Brasil * “dis of the difficulty > shold 

n | zil, or discov ene 

© support their needs, None of these — t oF work 

cou 


risking one’s li il di 

work 40 the N Gall af ry Pre ae 
At this point it will be well Wer lain tha tae 
not duc to the question of — Th t these demands 
found themselves tevictualled b 2 nent Of men who 
decreased, for nearly twen the zench had materially 

Serbi ty ousand had already left f 
ia. Further, after the evacuation of the Crim ` 
remitted to the French Government, as a guarant vy had 
expenses in which it might be involved, — ee 
amounted in all to one hundred million francs, I eae 
again, and explained that, if the French — insisted 
that my Army should be annihilated, the most honourable 
means would be to allow that Army to return to Russian ground 
weapon in hand, so that it might at least find death with 
honour. A series of measures was aimed against the refraGtory 
Russian General-in-Chief; my orders to the troops were inter- 
appa and I was deprived of the chance of visiting the camps. 
inally, I was invited to leave for Paris on the invitation of 
the French Government. I answered that I was ready to leave 
on condition that during my absence the dispatch of my men 
to Russia and Brazil was suspended, and that I was allowed 
a free return to Constantinople. The answer I received was 
that the dismemberment of my Army was inevitable and could 
not be further delayed. Carrying out the orders of the High 
Commissioners, the commander of the camp of Lemnos, 
General Brousseau, demanded an immediate answer with a 
of the three solutions I have mentioned above, 
and asked for a leave for rae 
Subordinates, unfortunately, took olens 


to the Russian command. 

kation. Some men who were thrust on 5 
—— into the water and got back to the — aa 
incidents made a very painful impression every 


88.22 A & to „ 


FSS ess 


BS a Fs 


ao P 
— aa oie ale oth 2 e+ 


— 


— . — Abdi 
THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER 34 


the Russian Press. A series of i i 
operations of 1 was raised against the 
een tragedy of the defenders of Russia as a nation found an 

o in part of the French Press. It protested against the violent 
treatment of those who a few months earlier were fighting 
under a flag recognized by the French Government. The 
Government found itself obliged to explain. An officiz! Note 
published by the Havas Agency declared that the measures 
taken to propel the Russians towards Russia were dictated by 
“humanitarian” considerations (I). 

At the same time the Government made known its resolve 
to remove those who had evacuated the Crimea from their 
dependence on the authority of General Wrangel, who was 
opposed to the measures taken. “All the Russians who find 
themselves in the camps”, said the Note, “should know that 
the Wrangel Army no longer exists; that their former com- 
manders . no orders to give them; that their decision 

ds on nobody; and that revictualling cannot last any 
longer.” It was easy to declare on paper that the Army of 
General Wrangel did not exist and the orders of its chiefs had 
no effect. It was less easy to translate these affirmations into 
fact. Bound by the same idea, by their faith in their chiefs, 
united by the blood they had shed and the privations they had 
endured in the camps of Gallipoli and Lemnos, the troops 
went on considering themselves under arms, subject to their 
officers, and in the first place to their Commander-in-Chief. 

“The Army which for seven years shed its blood for the 
common cause with France”, I wrote to the High Commis- 
sioners, is not the Army of General Wrangel, but it is the 
Russian Army, unless the French Government recognizes as 
such the Army whose chiefs signed the peace of Bre&-Litovsk. 
The desire of the French Government to see the 1 


troops 


At last, towards the month of Apri 
Constantinople as her French High —— to 


Paris, took the Russian question į 
pletely the attitude hithereo tater es pin com- 
the Russians of provisions Stopped; rations. | to deprive 


i . 


“43 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


continued to be served. General Brousseau was remo 
relations with the Russian Army palpably improved, ed, 


I cannot, however, pass in silence overt a E. 
of the attitude of the States of Europe towards the White | 
Army. During the 5 I started to distribute my Army 
in various countries. was a question about transferring 
it to Hungary. The Hungarian Minister of National Defence 
in answer to my request, wrote that, in spite of the sympathy 
a country like Hungary, newly freed from the Bolshevist yoke. 
felt for the soldiers ot General Wrangel, it was impossible * 
hour ascertaining the senti- 


Governments of the Entente, the signatories of 


and 


communicated 


document, signed by ch 4 
etto, the High Commissioners of the Entente Govern- 


ments called the attention of the Hungarian Government to 
the fact that 
The entry of the Army of General Wrangel into Hungarian 
territo could not fail. to excite commotion and facilitate 
anti-Bolshevist intri which are contrary to the true interests 
of Hungary and of all the civilized world, 
So the Allied Governments teftified that it was not Bolshevism, but 
anti-Bolshevift organizations which represented a danger to the 
intereits of Hungary and of the civilized world. . . » 
And this was said to a country which had gone 5 
horrors of Bolshevism and suffered the massacres of Bela Kun! 
The effect of the period of existence at Gallipoli and Lemnos 
with its many privations was to bring the men still closer 
er, to elimi te the weak and the waverers, and to give 
those who remained the strength to overcome all the privations 
which eventually awaited them. Thrown, in the middle of 
winter, without shelter or clothing, on the desert shore of 
Gallipoli or the arid island of Lemnos, unity of fecling 


Shortly on the site of the cam rose a little town built by 
the Army. Each Stone, each bit wood, each tent was carried 
by hand, for want of vehicles. The camps were adorned with 
odd churches, made out of the most unexpected materials. 


iS JF Sf Aao E 


EREA AFD 


PA ee a 


se 


r ee. T | 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSLA AND LATER 
ruins of Gallipoli were ornamented with drawings recalling the 
Fatherland. The approaches to the camps were brightened with 


regimental emblems marked out by the help of pebbles. 
Inscriptions bore witness to the deep love of the Fathesland, 


the sentiment of duty: 
Remember that thou belongest to Russia. 


Rassia knows that thou wilt do thy duty. 
Thy duty will only crase with death, 


Everything vouched for the fact that life at Gallipoli or 
Lemnos among the ruins, the destitution and the cold, with 
uite aaien 7 — could not injure the morale of the 
or reduce its bravery. 
er my arrival at Constantinople I took measures to 
organize the Army, so as to allow it to manage to satisfy its 
own needs by its own work, The principles which guided me 
were these: “The Army, not wishing to be a burden to the 
countries which gave it a place of refuge, feeds itself by 
working, till the day when it will be called to arms to do its 
duty to its country. 
e negotiations lasted long and met with great difficulties. 
At last, in the spring of 1921, the Government of the kingdom 
of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes agreed to employ a large 
of the cavalry to guard the frontiers; and the Cossacks of 
cuban, as well as the engineers, for various works of public 
utility, A little later Bulgaria agreed to welcome almost the 
whole of the rest of the forces. The transport of the troops 
began in May 1921, and by the beginning of 1922 they were 
already distributed in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Czecho-Slovakia. 
The last detachment left Gallipoli in the spring of 1923. 
_ With the arrival of the Army in the Balkans a new period of 
its 3 began. To set troops to work and make them 
22 e 585 the spade and the pickaxe is a 
ag psychologically and difficult in practice. This 
one by slow degrees, in accorda Ian i 
detail prepared in inate rdance with a plan of minute 
an to get over The and, even so, there were great 
int of v er, Balkans are, from the 
po View, but little devel d economic 
gs to take up, and canr, oped. They do not offer enough 
pope We had to apn work to large numbers of 
to band ssible by the or ors on Our Own account. That 
wait tganization of the A 
iting for its psycholop; rmy all ready 
ological adaptation to the 


* 


— 


. 


544 MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


new ways, it was impossible, without inj 
the troops, to distribute the men into too een moral f 
Gradually the Army go to work, and the number : Br 
were paid for by the High Command Nee of ena 
beginning the High Command had to be asbl AT the 
needs of all the officers and under-officers whose — for the 
was taken by general organizing. As the various y acle tite 
work, and the men got accustomed to the new order of * 
the cost of keeping the chiefs lessened; officers and 
officers set to work in their turn, and the number of 
whose needs the High Command saw to was teduced oo 
resent all the chicfs without exception ate gaining Ac 
ivelihood. The Russian officers and soldiers 3 their 
their bread, with no difference between them, by hea on 
in the mines, factories, and yards. The support of the — 
of the soldiery, the women, the wounded, and the sick who 
had been incapacitated for work during their services in the 
ranks, required a large expenditure, But this help was regarded 
by the Army as a debt of honour, At first the charges were bome 
by the High Command. By slow degrees the troops at work 
supported their families and the sick. 
took measures to form a fund for help in cach unit. These 
funds were maintained at first by the savings made out of the 
advances by the High Command. Later they were made up 
with money kept back from the men’s pay. The men readily 
recognized the necessity for this arrangement, and supported 
if with the utmost goodwill. A part of these sums is the 
property of the regiment. It provides the expenses of Saison 
and secretarial work, and is used to help men who are unem- 
ployed. The other part is the property of cach man, and is 
advanced to him in case of illness or urgent need. It is returned 
to him if he leaves the regiment. The formation and increase 
of this capital, guarantee the man against anything that cin 
happen, cover the expenses of removal to look for new work, 
and allow of the organization of infirmaries, the support of 
those out of work, etc. . 

In all this there is a formal principle, always maintained. 
No chief can receive any assistance, whether it be a salary or 
relief, at the of the deposits made by his men. 

When the y had got to work, it clear that 
economic conditions and the smallness of the pay ee px 
of a 


allow it to stay long in the Balkans. The necessity 


ty 
85, 


eee e 


i- eee. ee emg ell ee eee 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER 147 


distribution in the countries of Western Europe, where 
— is better 2 became beyond doubt. This 
was no longer to be ſcared. fur the Army had adapted 
itsclf to its new conditions and the danger of disorganization 
was removed. I started negotiations to send small detachments 
to France These departures continued tegularly from this 
time and stil! go on, The men who isolate themselves and leave 
their useful work, and the smal! groups who change their 
country in search of it, remain united to the Army, After their 
they rally round the nucleus existing on the Spot, or 
form new groups. No man, no detachment, remains isolated. 
Small units and individuals are bound up ae or Hr 
At the head of the new groups chiefs ate sclected who secure 
connection with the central services of the Army. The military 
ization of these groups of workers offers many advan- 
, The men do not feel isolated. They retain a bond with 
r comrades, with all those who have shared their ideas for 
, They do not feel lost in an environment which is strange 
* They can assist cach other, improve their position, 
pe funds for mutual aid, evening lectutes and libraries, 
meet for religious services. This system of holding together 
ws, further, a practical reason in its favour, for it influences 
'. rement of wages. The organization and discipline of 
military groups of workers make inevitably an impression on 
ihe managers of the businesses concerned. Very often these are 
rady to spend considerable sums to improve the position of 
the group. In numerous instances the management give a 
robbe hearing to the requests of the leader of the group, 
and grant large sums for the creation of churches and libraries, 
ind to house the officiating minister and give him a salary, 
Ajoint request by the members of the group, conveyed A 
the medium of its chief, is commonly accepted, when indi- 
viduals would ask in vain. . . 
_ While the Army was geographically distributed to facilitate 
ss search for work, I attempted to rally round it all the military 
Furs who had taken part in the Great War, not only on the 
Russian front, but also in France and at Salonika, as well as 
those who had joined in the fight against the Bolshevists on 
various fronts and found themselves scattered over all the 
pates of the world. All these men were linked together by 
idea—a boundless love of their country; they were 


to each other, and to the Army, the only organized 


546 MEM 
Oms OF GENERAL w 
n RANG 
8 centre. Anticipating these senti 7 
© form out of all these mena Sin el. 


Whicl 


forty thousand men with stron ties of uni eee 
uni 

rmy, an Army of workers with a flexible an nizatio 
very stag l sense of discipline, though tha 3 
voluntary. Di 
no means of punishment apart fro 
It s 7 aes of knights. 

members of this Army of workers live i 

labour. They give up a part of their pay to sup ent 
and help those wlio are ill or unemployed, Here is a thin 
unique in our practical and commercial century: an organiza- 
tion whose members not only receive no pay, but pour out 
their pennies gladly to remain in its ranks! These sums are 
almost enough for the needs of the Army, yet the organization 
to be kept up is huge. It has cost unheard-of efforts and the 
Strongest of wills; but the Russian Army in exile is to-day 
indestructible. It has no fear of poverty; it is used to the 
hardest work. Since it modified its outward form, it has no 
mote fear of those who wish it ill, for it is under the protection 
of the laws of the countries which have piven it shelter, 
It fears only one thing, the idea of ceasing to be the Russian 
Army, That is why it cannot give up its chief mission—the 
fight for the resurrection, the honour, and the glory of the 
fatherland. 

The General Union of Old Soldiers of Russia is an organiza- 
tion of evident weight. It is the only national Russian organiza- 
tion which represents abroad with lively strength the idea of 
the nation; it forms the counterpoise to the International, 
which has seized the land of Russia and bent it beneath its 

ke. As it owes no allegiance to any political party or any 
oreign Government, it represents by itself a great political 
force. The Union of the Old Soldiers of Russia preserves and 


CQO mS wee o ... 


fF EBs AF KF TFA wm ASMLaBR SR URE *42 2A BB 


THE WHITE ARMIES: IN RUSSIA AND LATER $47 


maintains the orders of the old ial Russian Army at the 
moral level it desires by means of lectures, conferences, and 
Clubs during the brief hours of leisure, and keeps up military 
attainments among its members. It brings together under the 
inspiration of one idea some tens of thousands of men; it 
unites them in a single military family with the motto, “All for 
one, one for all“; it supplies them with a means of mutual help ; 
and so it makes life easter for Russian patriots, and helps them 
to bear the calamities that have fallen upon them. There can be 
no doubt that, as soon as the Bolshevists fall, however that may 
happen, the Union is destined to play a decisive part in the 
resurrection of the national force in arms and in the re-establish- 
ment of law and order. The Red Army, which is a political 
organization intimately connected with the political régime 
whence it sprang, cannot survive it, and will disappear with it. 
To-day the Russian emigrants are divided into several 
poe clans which go on talking with passionate zeal. These 
i ions surprise eos: they do not realize that the 
existence of these differences shows that the difficult life 

of the exile has not killed his spirit; that we are seeking eagerly 
the larger hope; and that our sentiments turn with ardour to 
our country. In these wide divisions of emigrants the Union 
of Old Russian Soldiers has found general sympathy, and at 
this moment it counts friends and supporters in all the political 

of the Russian Dispersion. 


t is, then, the to of this izati 
ae ts political ideals p The are to organization? What 


MEMOIRS OF GENERAL WRANGEL 


Six years have passed since the day when we left our nat 
soul. By painful Ra the Russian Army gains its bread, native 
ing affronts and humiliations. But in spite of all its privatio 
and misfortunes it has not lost its faith in the approaching 
triumph of the sacred cause. OT the eyes of Europe a 
being opened to the real meaning ot Bolshevism, The nations 
of be are beginning to understand the danger of the 
Red —— of the risk the world of civilization runs in the 
existence of an international hot-bed which uses the immense 
resources of our land to keep up its destructive work. The 
heart of our country has been quickened by the forces of 
sanity; they will grow and cannot be stopped. We are no 
longer alone in our struggle. i 

nited as we are by all that we have lived through together, 

owing our existence to none but ourselves, we wait calmly for 
the day when our forces will be recalled by our country, and 
we shall give them to her an Ihe other day I visited the 
grave of the Unknown Soldier. What a magnificent symbol of 
heroism, love, and an Army’s self-sacrifice for its country 
Passers-by uncovered to pay homage to the hero. Every 
country has put up similar monuments. Everywhere the 
memory of the hero and patriot is commemorated. The 
Russian Army alone is forgotten. Its high deeds, its privations, 
and its sufferings are nowhere remem . Deprived of its 
country, hunted and disowned, it is forced to earn its bread 
by hard work, in the mines, the factories, the yards. The 
unknown Russian soldier, who has shed his blood so lavishly 
for the common cause, still waits for the moment of his 
honouring, His tomb is deserted. He has no crown, no 

of remembrance. But we ate confident that the hour of 
re ition is at hand. 

History, which knows no favouritism, will tell the 
importance of our Struggle, the capacity of our sacrifices. 
It will know that the fight we carried on for the love of our 
country, for the — ca of Russia as a nation, was | 
at the same time to safeguard the culture of Europe, the Struggle 
for an age-long civilization, for the defence of — t 
the Red terror. On that day the nations of will salute 
the Russian Army, paying homage to its valour, its sufferings, 
and its death agonies. 


TL 


\ 


De yy ee yeh 


On 
te, ea 
1 cS, mk 
si blood shra 
the Money 10 
Sno CTOWD, to en 
It thet the heer 1 


y of our uc 
far the love of cx 


f 
F. 
| 
b 
* 


aron 
Temir fe 


* ena 


157 1 
„ 
rs 
8 
13 

è 


7 
A 
ll 


=e 


l Sy 


N 
Kagren i NS 
— Hos 
Sh AT 
' iad 
be . a 


renn. 
— - 12 Poni N = SAI ye 
-29 ID tas , 1 1 iP s — > 

= = r ; 


„ T ; 
‘he 
Azo 


SAY i * 
Vast A 


Nr 
all N 


RIES 
AKERS OF HISTORY SE 
M 


$6.00 


j d Lord 
Lord Birdwoo tary of Lo 
jeld-Marshal ilitary secre d 
o FRAKLAND TONE 85 soldier who e and Commander 
The Nee : 5 Australian RA Churchill. 
1 ‘dig, With an Introduction by Sir 
in-Chief in India. 


6.00 
i icholas Horthy $ 
HORTHY MEMOIRS H.S.H. Admiral 9900 eben e 
H a 
i 0 45 d informative autobiography saree Sadie Emperor 
The colorful an By eee peed 
-five eventful years, Kuziro-HimGariém ; 
Hungary for twenty A ßer of e hoz e 
i ander-in 1 
Francis e until the murder of 90 a Bi Nichclas 19 8 
e his country by Stalin. With an introducti 
ki . 
veil bits American Minister to Hungary. 


$6.00 
° FINAL REPORT by Colonel Jozef Beck 


i ini ovidin 
The diplomatic Memoirs of the former Foreign Minister of 5 890 ic 
a vital record of Polish foreign relations in the era lust prior 


gore of the Curragh incident. With an intro- 
duction by Sir Arthur Bryant 
* EAST AFRICAN CAMPAIGNS by General Paul yon Lettow-Vorbeck $6.00 
e man John Gunther calls ‘The Prussian Lion of Africa! tells the fascin 
Sting story of his exciting battles jn East Africa during the irst World War 
one REVISITED by General Paul von Lettow-Vorbe k $4.00 
irty-five ears after his Campaigns the Gen tal visit d i 
activities, This is the record f his impressions Of th Nang ine SD Sante 
° IN THE STRUGGLE FoR FREEDOM py ladko Macek 
he i Spirational Utob $6 he 
roan biography the man Who, q p 
5 P 1 Peasant Par d Pre-Tito Vice-Premier of Y | e 1 8 of the 
opposite,’ regal r indepe Beka Saah, evoted 
o suffer injustic than to ing h 4 however, to the pr ciple th peal 
CHANCELLOR BEF E THE CATACL 
Thea eM s Ender a d 
© inside st $ $6.00 
World q A f ho 171 b 
of the depression End politics internation ee 
With EN ot Custom ll f Au r haan ares the 
Uction by p, Charles A gre failure ef thee lution 
lick Nstalt 
B 
85 1 SPE LE 
Sst 42nq treet 


